In an approach to explore alternative production strategies, we designed and generated various synthetic co-cultures (CoNoS, Communities of Niche-optimized Strains) consisting of complementary

In this study, we wanted to explore the potential role of TrpP in

All strains used in this study are listed in Table



Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study

Kan

sequence and additional terminators, used as PCR template for venus.

Unless otherwise stated, detailed characterization of single-strain growth behavior was performed via microscale (800 µL) cultivation in a BioLector (Beckman Coulter, Krefeld, Germany) as described previously [

To analyze amino acid production, main cultures were prepared from second precultures as described above by inoculation of 50 ml CGXII medium with 111 mM glucose to a starting OD

All plasmids used in this study are listed in Table

For strain evolution, the cells were cultivated in repetitive-batch mode using the Mini Pilot Plant as described previously [

Analysis of the concentrations of

For analysis of the gene expression profile of

In this study, we wanted to investigate the potential role of TrpP in

First, we wanted to clarify whether the growth defect was caused by deletion of the

To exclude that the observed growth defect of WT Δ



Growth of the

To test whether the growth defect of WT Δ

We performed a detailed in silico analysis of the



Transcriptional organization and genomic context of

TrpP is a protein of 170 amino acids with a theoretical molecular mass of approximately 17.7 kDa and a pI of 6.73. According to several topology prediction tools, it has three transmembrane (TM) helices with the N-terminus in the periplasm and the C-terminus in the cytoplasm (Fig.

According to the current knowledge, there are three theories regarding TrpP function: (i) TrpP has a transporter function, but this is based on an old annotation and rather unlikely due to just three transmembrane helices, (ii) TrpP is a membrane protein with potential regulatory function by interaction with another protein. In this case, the C-terminal extension might influence TrpP activity, e.g. by binding to a possible ligand. (iii) Entirely different functions to i) and ii). In the following, we describe our strategy to obtain a better understanding of TrpP function.



AlphaFold model of TrpP and alignment with SdpI. (

As described in the introduction, TrpP was annotated as a potential

The growth performance as well as



Characterization of the influence of

The characterization of the

Among the genes whose expression was most strongly upregulated (2.7-4.0-fold) was the

Among the downregulated genes were many involved in uptake and metabolism of various carbon sources, such as ethanol (

Overall,



Volcano plot of the transcriptome analysis of WT Δ

As previous experiments did not reveal a clear reason why

ALE was performed in triplicate with



ALE with C1* ΔTRP Δ

To test whether the mutations we found were indeed responsible for the improved growth of the evolved strains, we introduced two of them into WT ΔTRP Δ



Growth of

SufR is a transcriptional repressor of the

In the literature, three transcriptional start sites are known for SufR in

SufR of



Transcriptional organization of

To test whether TSS1 is the major TSS of SufR, we performed a promoter activity assay. For this purpose, we constructed the plasmid pJC1-P

We showed above that inactivation or deletion of



Testing different promoters in front of

Above, we showed that

As previously observed for the WT (Fig.



Characterization of the influence of

In our study, we wanted to elucidate the cause of the growth limitation of the auxotrophic strain WT ΔTRP Δ

The transcriptome comparison of the

The increased expression of

WhcA is a WhiB-like (Wbl) protein. Wbl proteins are small proteins of approximately 40–140 amino acids that are exclusively present in Actinobacteria [

The

When our data were analyzed, we asked how

The similarity of TrpP to the SdpI protein of

In our study, we wanted to investigate the potential role of TrpP in



Schematic model of a putative signal transduction pathway involving TrpP. Yellow flash: stimulus, Tip: TrpP interacting protein

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.



Supplementary Material 1