Metabolism of L-carnitine in

In the present study, we make use of recombinantly purified carnitine monooxygenase, MSA-DH and MDH for the

Constructs pGEX-6P-1-

For pathway reconstitution experiments, the codon-optimized BCCT gene (Aci1347) was cloned into plasmid pGEX-6P-1-

The individual subunits CntA and CntB of carnitine monooxygenase were produced and purified as described elsewhere (

MSA-DH fused to an N-terminal His-thioredoxin tag or MDH fused to an N-terminal His-tag was overproduced in

The apo form of MDH was obtained by EDTA treatment. Purified MDH (~1 mL) was dialyzed for 4 h in 1 L buffer 2 (20 mM MOPS-KOH pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl) containing 10 mM EDTA followed by three times dialysis against 1 L of buffer 2.

The concentration of purified proteins was determined using Bradford reagent (Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with bovine serum albumin as a standard.

The standard L-carnitine depletion assay was performed as detailed under (

MSA was generated by quantitative turnover of 20 mM L-carnitine in the presence of 20 mM NADH in a 1 mL carnitine monooxygenase reaction as mainly detailed under (

The activity of MSA-DH or MDH was measured in a continuous spectroscopic assay by determining the initial rate of NADH formation at 340 nm, at a temperature of 27°C using an extinction coefficient of ϵ

The activity of MSA-DH was also followed by monitoring MSA turnover at 27°C. A typical assay in a volume of 500 μL buffer 1 contained 400 μM MSA, 0.2 μM MSA-DH and 2 mM NAD

Samples from MSA-DH assays, from MDH assays or from pathway reconstitution experiments were separated on a Repromer H column (300 × 4,6 mm, 9 μm, TECHLAB GmbH) using a HPLC-system equipped with a degasser (DG-1580-54, Jasco), a gradient unit (LG-1580-04, Jasco), a pump (PU-1580, Jasco), a sampler (AS-1555, Jasco), a column oven (CO-1560, Jasco) and a multi wavelength detector (MD-1515, Jasco). Isocratic separation (~ 50 μL) was performed using 3 mM sulfuric acid as liquid phase at a flow rate of 0.5 mL min

The separation of D- and L-malate was performed on a Chirex 3126 (D)-penicillamine column (150 × 4.6 mm, Phenomenex Inc.) using the above chromatography system as detailed mainly under application note TN-1005. Isocratic enantiomer separation was at a flow rate of 1 mL min

Purified protein fractions at a concentration of 20–30 μM were subjected to UV–vis spectroscopy using a V-650 UV–Vis spectrophotometer (Jasco).

The native molecular mass of MSA-DH and MDH was determined by analytical size exclusion chromatography. A Superdex 200 increase 5/150 GL column (GE Healthcare) was calibrated with protein standards (molecular weight marker kit MWGF200 and thyroglobulin and apoferritin from Sigma) in the presence of 20 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl at a flow rate of 0.45 mL min

The mass photometry experiments were performed on a Refeyn TwoMP mass photometer (Refeyn Ltd). Movies of 60 s (regular FOV) were recorded for 25 nM MDH or 25 nM MSA-DH, respectively in PBS with filtered PBS as a reference using AquireMP (Refeyn Ltd). Evaluation was performed in DiscoverMP (Refeyn Ltd) and molecular masses were determined by matching histogram contrast against a molecular weight standard (Invitrogen/Thermo NativeMark™, LC0725).

Crystallization trials were set up at room temperature with a Crystal Gryphon crystallization robot (Art Robbins Instruments) in Intelli 96–3 plates (Art Robbins Instruments) with 200 nL protein solution at a concentration of 40 mg/mL supplemented with 7 mM D-malate and 200 nL reservoir solution. Well-diffracting crystals were obtained after a few days in condition G8 of the Pi-PEG screen (Jena Bioscience), containing 34.3% (w/v) PEG 550 monomethyl ether and 2.9% (w/v) PEG 300. Crystals were after harvesting flash cooled in liquid N

Data collection was performed at beamline P11 at the Petra III storage ring (Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron, Hamburg, Germany) (

The structure of MSA-DH was determined by molecular replacement using a model generated by Alpha-Fold2 (

NADP

The catalytic component CntA and the related reductase CntB of carnitine monooxygenase from

Purification and characterization of the enzymes of the L-carnitine degrading pathway.

Overproduction of MSA-DH in

Published carnitine monooxygenase assays rely on the enzymatic quantification of the L-carnitine substrate (

Here, a simple and efficient assay was established which is based on the quantification of the second reaction product of carnitine monooxygenase (

Carnitine monooxygenase activity assays.

UV–visible absorption spectroscopy of concentrated protein samples did not show the presence of a chromophoric cofactor. Analytical size exclusion chromatography revealed a native molecular mass of 281 kDa (

Mass photometry is an alternative experimental technique which allows for the mass measurement of native molecules in solution. Particles are illuminated with a focused laser beam, and their motion is captured by a camera. By analyzing the fluctuations in the scattered light, it’s possible to derive the mass of biomolecules (

The aldehyde substrate of the proposed MSA-DH is not commercially available. Therefore, the enzymatic activity of MSA-DH was initially shown in a coupled assay containing carnitine monooxygenase (5 μM CntA and 15 μM CntB) and 5 μM MSA-DH in the presence of the respective cofactors NADH (10 mM) and NAD

Identification of MSA-DH and MDH reaction products.

For the subsequent characterization of MSA-DH, substantial amounts of the enzyme substrate were produced enzymatically. The CntA/CntB reaction was carried out on a large scale in the presence of high concentrations of L-carnitine (20 mM) and NADH (20 mM). After an incubation time of 60 min, quantitative substrate and NADH conversion with equimolar MSA production was verified by absorption spectroscopy in combination with the MBTH-based aldehyde quantification method. Subsequent precipitation of CntA/CntB revealed an MSA-containing fraction which was used to provide the enzyme substrate for further biochemical experiments.

In a first MSA-DH

MSA-DH activity experiments in the presence of the cofactor NAD

Conversion of MSA into malate in MSA-DH activity experiments was confirmed by standard HPLC experiments (

Reaction products from a standard MSA-DH assay were fractionated by preparative HPLC separation (compare

To further investigate the molecular mechanism and cofactor utilization of MSA-DH, the X-ray protein structure was determined at 2.6 Å (data collection and refinement statistics in

Overall crystal structure of MSA-DH.

The overall fold of MSA-DH is similar to other proteins of the aldehyde dehydrogenase family (

Domain architecture of the MSA-DH monomer. The Rossmann dinucleotide-binding domain is shown in

Every monomer possesses two funel-like invaginations (

Substrate and co-substrate funnels of MSA-DH. A monomer of MSA-DH (

Coordinates of

Substrate binding site of MSA-DH with

The potential substrate binding site of MSA-DH was explored by superimposing the three-dimensional structure of human succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase in complex with its substrate (PDB ID: 2W8Q) (

In

Subsequently, the enzymatic mechanism of MSA-DH was deduced from the solved X-ray crystal structure with the superimposed MSA and NADP

For human succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase, reversible disulfide bond formation of the active site cysteine (Cys

Subsequent investigations were performed to elucidate the involvement of the postulated MDH enzyme in the L-carnitine degradation pathway.

Concentrated protein samples of MDH did not indicate the presence of a chromophoric cofactor as judged bei UV–visible absorption spectroscopy. Analytical size exclusion chromatography revealed a native molecular mass of 234,000 Da, which is in agreement with a tetrameric or a pentameric MDH architecture (

The enzymatic activity of the proposed MDH was initially demonstrated in pathway reconstitution experiments. Therefore, a coupled assay containing carnitine monooxygenase, MSA-DH and 5 μM MDH in the presence of the respective cofactors NADH (10 mM) and NAD

Alternatively, MDH activity was followed in a spectroscopic assay which monitors the formation of NADH (

Complete loss of activity was observed after EDTA treatment and dialysis of MDH. Enzymatic activity of this apo enzyme was fully restored upon Mg

The orthologous D-malate dehydrogenase from

As indicated in

Presence of 2 mM

In summary, it has been shown that the MDH of

Bacterial L-carnitine metabolism is important for understanding the resilience of potentially pathogenic organisms. However, the overall contribution of the CntA-mediated conversion of L-carnitine has been controversial in the context of microbiome investigations (

Based on bioinformatics investigations, orthologous

High

Subsequently, growth experiments on carnitine containing minimal medium were initiated using different strains of

L-carnitine is a quaternary amine compound that serves a variety of physiological functions. Due to its zwitterionic nature, it plays an important role in protecting microbes from osmotic, thermal, cryogenic, and barometric stresses by acting as a compatible solute (

For

From the evolutionary perspective, the formation of the unusual D-malate intermediate prevents the direct channeling of malate into the TCA cycle which requires the presence of one further enzyme (MDH). But why has no synthetic pathway evolved that leads directly to the synthesis of L-malate? As can be seen in

In recent years, the bacterial formation of TMA has attracted much attention due to its medical relevance. TMA has been shown to be a gut microbiota-dependent metabolite that is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. TMA formed from dietary nutrients such as carnitine or choline is absorbed by the intestinal epithelium and subsequently oxidized to TMAO by hepatic flavin monooxygenases. Several studies have found a positive association between elevated plasma TMAO levels and mortality, particularly deaths due to cardiovascular and renal disease (