There have been several reports about human patients infected with

Differentiation of

Timoney

Thirty

REP, repetitive extragenic palindromic sequences; ERIC, enterobacterial repetitive
intergenic consensus sequences;

DNA was extracted from the isolates by suspending them in Tris-EDTA buffer and boiling
them at 97°C for 10 min. We performed a

The ID TEST HN-20 Rapid system (Nissui Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was used
to assess the biochemical reactions because this kit is commonly used in Japanese clinical
settings [

ID TEST HN-20 Rapid system (Nissui Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was used
to assess the biochemical reactions.

We conducted genotyping using REP- or ERIC-PCR fingerprinting, as previously reported
[

Based on the PCR product images generated after agarose gel electrophoresis, the
unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean (UPGMA) dendrograms were constructed
using the Jaccard index for polymorphic DNA fingerprinting data obtained from the primer
sets to randomly amplify REP and ERIC sequences. For this, we used the DendroUPGMA
(http://genomes.urv.cat/UPGMA/index.php) and NJplot (http://doua.prabi.fr/software/njplot)
programs. Cluster clades were determined based on the dendrogram findings. The results
from trehalose fermentation analysis were combined with the dendrogram findings.

The complete circular whole-genome sequences (WGSs) of five available Korean

To determine the full-length nucleotide sequences, we designed PCR amplification primer
sets (forward/reverse) with sequencing primer(s) using Primer3Plus
(https://www.primer3plus.com) online. The specificity of the primer sequences was examined
by inserting them into the nucleotide basic local alignment search tool on the NCBI
website (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). To assess the accuracy of the primer
sequences within the genome sequences encoding the enzyme, we conducted simulation PCR
analysis using Serial Cloner 2.6 (http://serialbasics.free.fr/Serial_Cloner.html) using
WGSs, as previously described [

We used PCR-based amplification primer sets that were identical to the simulation
PCR-based primer sets. During the PCR assay with the isolates, a DNA sample extracted from
PA42 or PA57 having the determined WGSs was used as a positive control. Direct sequencing
was performed using the Applied Biosystems 3730xl DNA Analyzer with a BigDye Terminator
V3.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). We obtained direct sequencing data for
all PCR-positive products using the same amplification and sequencing primers. The results
of biotype analysis based on trehalose fermentation were compared with the nucleotide
sequence data.

To assess the similarities among the deduced amino acid (AA) sequences from the
nucleotide sequences of Korean and Japanese

Five ethical committees from Kitasato Institute Hospital, Kitasato University Medical
Center, Sanritsu Zelkova Veterinary Laboratory, Sanritsu Laboratory, and Chiba Kaihin
Municipal Hospital reviewed and approved the study design to maintain the privacy of human
patients, diseased dogs, and cats (approval numbers 21061, 2021033, SZ20220525, 22-01, and
2021-02, respectively).

Background information (host species, isolation source, collection date, and geographic
location) regarding the WGSs is available on the NCBI website.

We performed two-sided Fisher’s exact test to analyze the significant relationships
between the biotypic results/human population and clades using REP- or ERIC-PCR
fingerprinting. A web-based statistical application 2-way Contingency Table Analysis
(http://www.grade-jpn.com/2x2.html) was applied. Statistical significance was set at

In contrast, the two related subspecies

Unweighted Pair Group Method with Arithmetic mean dendrograms based on polymorphic
DNA fingerprinting date using repetitive extragenic palindromic sequence-based
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) [

We found no association between the trehalose-positive prevalence or human population and
the two (A–1/–2) clades on the REP-dendrogram or three (B–1/–2/–3) clades on the
ERIC-dendrogram. There was also no association between the glucosidase-positive or nitrite
reduction-positive prevalence and the two clades or three clades on the dendrograms.

To search for nucleotide sequence of

Genome structures containing trehalose-6-phosphate hydrolase gene
(

Many individuals have pet animals, including dogs and cats, in their homes. Medical
hospitals and nursing homes have introduced animal-assisted therapy as a mental health
service for hospitalized patients and elderly residents [

Mutters

Repetitive sequence-based PCR fingerprinting has been applied only to a small number of

Trehalose, a disaccharide, plays a role in osmotic stress protection in many
microorganisms. These two glucose molecules are linked 1–1 alpha-glycosidically. Thus,
trehalose is non-reducing and possesses the unique ability to maintain membrane fluidity
under extracellular conditions of dryness and desiccation [

We obtained limited host demographics (i.e., host species, isolation source, collection
date, and geographic location) for the

Thus, our observations suggest that

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.