The genes required for the production of some thermophilins have been characterized, including thermophilin 13, a two-component bacteriocin (

Strains LMD-9 and ST106 required the addition of a synthetic BlpC30 to the growth medium to induce bacteriocin production (

Previous work from our laboratory described the natural production of an anti-pediococcal bacteriocin, thermophilin 110, by

The purpose of this study was to determine which genes within the

Bacteriocin activity was measured using an agar diffusion method (

Sequencing of the

Real time PCR primers pairs.

An integrative vector for knocking out

The nucleic acid sequence (162 base pairs) corresponding to the mature BlpU peptide (excluding the 23 amino acid leader peptide) was amplified from

The plasmid was transformed into

The mature BlpU peptide (53 aa: GCSWGGFAKQGVATGVGNGLRLGIKTRTWQGA-VAGAAGGAIVGGVGYGATCWW) was synthesized and purified by high-performance liquid chromatography (Lifetein LLC, South Plainfield, NJ) to a purity of 85.9%. The peptide was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) at a stock concentration of 4.6 mg/mL. Further dilution to a working stock of 100 μg/mL was carried out in ddH

Chromosome walking was used to sequence the

Map of the

In strain B59671, the region between the

The nucleic acid sequences upstream of the

Previously it was reported that thermophilin 110 was naturally produced by

Real-time PCR analysis of

Thermophilin 110 was previously reported to induce cell lysis of

Lysis of

Additionally, the activity spectrum of thermopilin 110 was confirmed using a selection of previously reported susceptible bacteria (

Antimicrobial activity of bacteriocins produced by

To determine which genes encoded active bacteriocins within the B59671

Antimicrobial activity of

Since the creation of a

Expression of recombinant mature BlpU peptide in

To further establish that BlpU is an active bacteriocin in the absence of other components encoded within the

Antimicrobial activity of the chemically synthesized mature BlpU peptide against selected bacterial targets:

Natural production of

The

In strain LMG18311, a truncation in BlpB explains why the

Homologs of

Characterization of the antimicrobial activity associated with

Results from this study have shown for the first time that

The genome sequence for S. thermophilus B59671, which includes the blp gene cluster shown, is deposited in GenBank with the accession number CP022547.

JR: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. GS: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. PQ: Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing –review & editing. DS: Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. MM: Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. AM: Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. GG: Writing – review & editing. AO: Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – review & editing.