CpxR contributes to the carbapenem antibiotics resistance of classical and hypervirulent

CpxR binds to the promoter region of

CpxR binds to the promoter of the

Bacterial two-component systems (TCSs) are important signal transduction systems that sense and respond to changes in the external environment. TCS usually consists of two components: a cell membrane protein histidine kinase (HK) and a cytosolic protein response regulator (RR). In response to extracellular changes, HK autophosphorylates at the conserved histidine residues and transfers the phosphoryl group to cognate RR. The phosphorylated RR binds to promoters and controls gene expression at the transcriptional level [

We previously reported the carbapenem-resistant ST11 cKP clinical isolate HS11286, in which

All strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table S1. All primers used in this study are listed in Table S2. All deletion mutants were generated by lambda red recombination and allelic exchange using the suicide vector pKOBEG-Apra as described in Bi

The disc diffusion assay was performed according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute standard (CLSI, 2023). Fresh bacterial cells were made into bacterial suspensions with a McFarland turbidity of 0.5. After evenly spreading on Mueller-Hinton agar, a Meropenem Antimicrobial Susceptibility disc (Oxoid, 10 μg) was placed in the centre of the plate. After incubating at 37°C for 16 h, the diameter of the zone of inhibition was measured.

For the agar screening, a spot assay was used to determine bacterial sensitivity to meropenem. In brief, the bacterial suspensions with an OD

The minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were determined using the broth microdilution method according to the CLSI standard (2023). The tested strains were inoculated at a final concentration of 0.5 McFarland standard into CAMHB (Cation-Adjusted Mueller-Hinton Broth) medium supplemented with meropenem at concentrations of 64, 32, 16, 8, 4, 2, 1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125, 0.06, and 0.03 μg/ml. When determining the MIC of Meropenem-vaborbactam (MEV), a final concentration of 8 µg/ml vaborbactam was added to the mixture of the aforementioned bacterial cultures and meropenem. The cultures were incubated at 37°C under ambient air for 16 h, and bacterial growth was observed to determine the MIC.

The wild-type

Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) were carried out by mixing wild-type or mutated CpxR at a range of concentrations with EMSA/Gel-Shift Binding Buffer (poly(dI-dC), DTT, Glycerol, EDTA, NaCl, MgCl

DNase I footprinting assays were performed according to the method described by Wang

Isothermal titration calorimetry experiments were performed on a TA NANO system. Genomic DNA was extracted from

Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). Then gDNA was removed and cDNA was produced by PrimeScript

The β-galactosidase activity was quantified based on the hydrolysis of O-Nitrobenzene-β-D-galactopyranoside (ONPG). Bacteria were subcultured in LB broth to logarithmic phase (OD

Bacteria were subcultured in LB broth to the logarithmic phase. Two millilitres of donor cells and recipient cells were washed with 10 mM MgSO

The data of promoter activity and qRT-PCR were derived from three independent assays. Student’s

To better understand the involvement of TCS in antibiotic resistance, we first predicted all the potential TCSs encoded in the chromosome of ST11 cKP HS11286 using the Prokaryotic 2-Component Systems database (P2CS) [

Identification of a two-component system that is required for resistance to β-lactam antibiotics in

Meropenem resistance in

CpxR recognizes and binds to the promoter region of

Having established a direct binding of CpxR to the

CpxR promotes the transcription of

Initially identified as a major regulator of the

CpxR is required for the efficient transfer of the IncFII

The pKPHS2 plasmid of

CpxR promotes the transcription of

CpxR binds to the

The transfer of

CpxR regulates meropenem resistance in recipient strains containing an acquired

Carbapenem antibiotics are one of the most important antibacterial drugs for the treatment of serious bacterial infections. Their effectiveness is compromised by the recent emergence of CRE in clinics, especially the problematic carbapenem-resistant hypervirulent

Proposed model for CpxR-mediated transcriptional regulation of

By performing an unbiased screen of twenty-four TCS knockout mutants, we discovered that CpxAR is the sole system in

CpxR promotes carbapenem resistance by a direct regulation of resistance genes

Different from the chromosomally encoded

CpxR regulates transcription by binding directly to the promoter region of target genes. The canonical binding sites were thought to resemble a sequence motif GTAAA-(N)

By screening twenty-four putative TCS encoded on the chromosome of

Click here for additional data file.

Click here for additional data file.

Click here for additional data file.

Click here for additional data file.

Click here for additional data file.

Click here for additional data file.

Click here for additional data file.