Environmental systems are critical to human health; therefore, contamination caused by anthropogenic activities is monitored and controlled [

Some drugs are not harmful to the environment because they are present in extremely low concentrations, whereas others can be detrimental [

Aspirin (ASP), which is also known as acetylsalicylic acid, is one of the most commonly used pharmaceuticals worldwide. It was synthesized in the 19th century and used to treat inflammation, pain, and cardiovascular diseases [

To minimize the potential risks posed by drugs, it is necessary to develop techniques to detect, monitor, and remove pharmaceuticals, including ASP. There is widespread awareness of the potential threats posed by pharmaceuticals to environmental systems. Therefore, there have been numerous studies on the detection and monitoring of these chemicals using analytical instruments, such as high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and mass spectroscopy (MS) [

Among these new tools, bacterial cell-based biosensors have been actively investigated because they are simple, inexpensive, and enable rapid analysis [

In the present study, we constructed

The reporter plasmid pMarO-eGFP, consisting of the promoter region of the

The 3-D structure of MarR has been solved and deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB ID numbers 1JGS and 5H3R) [

The biosensors generated by the co-transformation of pCDF-MarRs and pMarO-eGFP into

To evaluate its applicability, the concentrations of ASP in artificially amended water samples and aspirin tablets were evaluated. Artificially amended samples with concentrations of 10, 20, and 50 mM were prepared and subsequently investigated using biosensors. The 20.0 mg of aspirin tablets were ground, dissolved in 1 mL of ethanol, and applied to the biosensors. Among the tested biosensors, MarR T72A, which demonstrated an enhanced ASP response, was selected for aspirin quantification. As described above, the biosensor cells were freshly incubated in LB broth and then exposed to 0–1 mM ASP until the OD

All experimental data were obtained from more than three tests, and the values are indicated as the mean and standard deviation. Statistical analysis and data validation were performed using the R version 4.3.0 package DescTools version 0.99.59 [

The

As described above, the biosensor comprising MarR WT and pMarO-eGFP was SA-specific. Because the specificity of TF-based biosensors is determined by the TF (i.e., MarR in the present case), the target of the biosensors can be changed by modulating the specificity of the TF. Therefore, it is possible to shift the target specificity of biosensors from SA to other molecules possessing structural similarity, such as ASP, by genetic engineering using MarR. As shown in

To evaluate the effects of genetic engineering on MarR, all the mutants were introduced with pMarO-eGFP into

Since the biosensors with MarR T72A and T72V showed enhanced responses to ASP, they were selected as sensing elements for evaluating ASP specificity. Prior to the assay, it was necessary to validate the selectivity of the biosensors, which were then subjected to selectivity tests with 1 mM of SA and its derivatives. As shown in

As described above, it is difficult to generate ASP-specific MarRs by genetic engineering based on 3-D structural analysis. Although the target specificity of

To examine the applicability of MarR T72A, we determined the amount of ASP in artificially contaminated water samples and commercially available aspirin tablets from pharmacies. The samples were supplied to the biosensor cells at several dilutions, and a known concentration of ASP was supplied to the biosensor cells to construct a standard curve for quantification. Following the same procedure used for the biosensor assay, the fluorescence signals induced by ASP were determined after 2 h of exposure. As shown in

In the case of ASP quantification in aspirin tablets, the biosensor indicated that the amount of ASP was 31.68 ± 1.25, which was much lower than the expected value estimated from the description of ASP contents. To confirm the performance of the new biosensor for ASP quantification, the aspirin tablet samples were subjected to liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) analysis. The results are listed in

In the present study, we aimed to generate ASP-sensing

Specificity toward SA should be carefully considered when developing a new biosensor for ASP monitoring. Although extensive genetic engineering was applied to obtain MarR mutants specific to ASP, achieving this was challenging due to inherent characteristics of MarR, such as its SA specificity and the presence of two SA binding sites. As shown in

This study successfully developed an