Urinary tract infections (UTI) are one of the commonest infections of humans, only second to respiratory tract infections in the rate of occurrence. The high morbidity of UTI, especially in reproductive age women, coupled with increased rates of antibiotic resistance among the commonly used UTI drugs, significantly contribute to increased healthcare costs for this condition [

Uropathogenic

The

PapGII has been shown to be strongly associated with pyelonephritis in adult women and children [

The

Therefore, we studied urinary

This prospective study included 11 regional hospitals and 23 outpatient centers, in the Central West region of New South Wales (NSW), Australia. It was conducted with the help of volunteer physicians in the participating centers. A guiding protocol for urine collection and a strict clinical diagnostic criteria for defining cystitis or pyelonephritis, was given to each participating physician. Based on the medical history and patient physical examination, physicians recorded the following information in each patient recruited into the study; de-identified patient information: age, clinical UTI syndrome, previous UTI history, and any known underlying host conditions.

Consecutively collected

A diagnosis of cystitis or pyelonephritis required specific manifestations, as recorded by the treating medical practitioner based on a standardized protocol, and a MSU culture yielding ≥ 10

Fecal control isolates were collected from consenting volunteers, who lacked UTI-associated manifestations as per self-report. These controls were matched with UTI subjects by age and, as closely as possible, by place of residence within the region. Each volunteer provided a written informed consent and a rectal swab. Rectal swabs were processed within 15 h of collection, and one arbitrarily chosen

The Sydney West Area Health Service (SWAHS) Human Ethics Research Committee and Charles Sturt University Ethics committee approved the study protocol. Guidelines for experimentation at the authors’ institutions were followed in the conduct of this clinical research. Since clinical information for patients with UTI was collected anonymously, patient consent was not obtained. However, written informed consent was obtained from each individual in the case of faecal specimens from healthy controls.

Distribution of

Each molecular testing was done in duplicate, and with independently prepared DNA lysates of the test isolates and with appropriate positive and negative controls.

Comparisons of proportions was done by Chi-square or Fisher’s exact tests whilst VF scores were compared using the Mann–Whitney U-test. For comparisons of proportions for different characteristics in the same population, McNemar’s test was used. P values < 0.05 were considered significant.

The majority of pyelonephritis (75%) and cystitis (62%) isolates harboured at least one

As previously observed, an overwhelming majority of pyelonephritis (80%) and cystitis (70%) isolates belonged to phylogenetic group B2, and a much lower proportion to group D at about 10% each for both clinical syndromes. In contrast to the UTI isolates, a much lower proportion of fecal isolates belonged to group B2 (32%), and a higher proportion to groups A (22%) and B1 (20%). However, the proportion of fecal isolates belonging to group D was almost equal to that in both pyelonephritis and cystitis isolates at 13%. The remaining phylogenetic groups were distributed variously different amongst the three groups, ranging from 1 to 8%.

On average, pyelonephritis isolates harboring

Distribution of phylogenetic groups and virulence factor (VF) genes in relation to

In terms of the relationship between

Similar to pyelonephritis isolates, on average, cystitis

Distribution of phylogenetic groups and virulence factor (VF) genes in relation to

Similar to pyelonephritis isolates, the majority (75%) of cystitis isolates belonged to phylogenetic group B2, with a greater proportion of

An overwhelming majority of pyelonephritis isolates harbouring only the

Distribution of

For cystitis isolates,

Distribution of

Our aim was to understand the role played by

The predominance of the

On average, pyelonephritis and cystitis isolates, irrespective of

VF gene distribution by

Interestingly, although

Since we had a reasonable number of cystitis isolates that had a combination genotype of

We further analysed the association between the different

In the case of cystitis isolates, the majority (65%) of

The majority of

When compared by

Although the above argument that

Although our findings seem to suggest association of specific

In 25% and 38% of pyelonephritis and cystitis isolates, respectively, both the major subunit gene (

Although the

The identification of a small proportion of cystitis isolates (3%) with the

Strengths of this study include the large number of well-characterized cystitis, pyelonephritis, and fecal isolates, from the same geographical region and time period. This is important since human-associated

Study limitations include the use of multiple comparisons, which can increase the chance of type 1 errors [

Findings from this study suggest that the association of the

