As the basic unit of proteins, amino acids play an important role in the nutrition and health maintenance of humans and animals (

The metabolic pathway of L-threonine production in

In

Dynamic regulation can prevent metabolic burden on cells caused by constitutive gene expression in L-threonine production. We previously designed a positive feedback strategy to dynamically regulate the expression of threonine transporters, which alleviated the adverse effects of overexpressed transporters on cells and excreted intracellular metabolites (

In this study, we developed a new strategy for dynamic and balanced regulation of the

The strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in

RBS characterization was achieved by monitoring the RFP fluorescence and cell density in real-time using a multiple detection microplate analyzer (SynergyHT, BioTek, Winooski, VT, United States). The details are as follows. The seeds of RBS characterization strains were prepared by transferring a single colony to a 12-well microassay plate containing 2 mL LB medium with 34 μg/mL chloramphenicol. The cells were grown at 37°C for 12 h. Next, 2% (v/v) of the seeds were inoculated into 0.2 mL LB medium with 34 μg/mL chloramphenicol in a 96-well microassay plate to detect red fluorescence. The 96-well plate was incubated at 37°C with oscillation. During RBS characterization, strain growth was measured at 600 nm. The red fluorescence was detected by excitation at 590 nm and emission at 645 nm.

LB medium was used for plasmid construction and RBS strength characterization. L-threonine fermentation medium consists of 15 g/L (NH

The fed-batch culture was carried out in a 5-L bioreactor containing 4L medium (20 g/L (NH

One milliliter of the culture was mixed vigorously, and 0.1 mL was transferred to a 1.5 mL centrifuge tube. One millimolar HCl (0.9 mL) was added to this culture, and the sample was mixed to remove residual CaCO

For the detection of L-threonine, the collected supernatant was deproteinized with 5% trichloroacetic acid. Subsequently, the pretreated supernatant was derivatized with triethylamine and phenyl isothiocyanate, followed by extraction with

In the biosynthesis of L-threonine in

Comparison of the fermentation results of overexpressed

The results showed that different combinations of

The effect of different expression intensities of

The effect of different expression intensities of

In summary, the results showed that when the expression of

As described above, L-threonine production was promoted by carefully regulating the expression levels of

The effect of dynamic regulation of

The effect of dynamic control of the

Although we increased L-threonine productivity by using a stationary phase promoter, the strains with better growth in the early stage also produced a large amount of acetate (

The phosphotransferase system (PTS) is the major glucose transport system in

The growth of the three strains was retarded after deleting

The effect of deleting

To further verify the properties of P

The fed-batch process with P

The reaction catalyzed by ThrC is the rate-limiting step of L-threonine production and overexpression of

L-threonine production using different strategies.