Visceral leishmaniasis is a widespread zoonotic disease of major public health and veterinary importance that occurs on all the continents except for Oceania [

Transmission of

This study describes

Nine newly adopted 2—month-old mixed Rottweiler pups including four females and five males from the same litter were taken to two veterinary clinics in central Israel for routine vaccination during March and April 2019. The owners reported lesions on their dogs during the vaccination period and on subsequent visits

The lesions on the affected pups varied from localized to generalized exfoliative dermatitis on the face, around the eyes, on the ears, pinna, back, elbows, and nasal dorsum (nos. 1 and 2) (Fig.

Exfoliate dermatitis in the puppies.

Clinical manifestations, gender, age at onset of clinical signs, serology, polymerase chain reaction (

Lymph node, blood, conj.

Lymph node, blood

Ulcerative lesions on the lower muzzle of pup no. 7 (

The sire of the litter presenting with exfoliative dermatitis typical of canine leishmaniosis over the face and around the eyes (

Multiple skin scrapings from lesions of the seven pups with dermal lesions were performed and samples were evaluated for

Blood samples were collected from the cephalic vein and samples were sent for hematology, serum biochemistry, PCR and serology for

Serology for anti-leishmanial antibodies was performed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using

All nine pups were PCR positive. Seven were positive by conjunctival, five by blood, four by lymph node, and one by skin PCR for an ulcerative lesion (no. 7) (Table

Distribution of outcomes of

The sire, which had typical clinical signs of CanL including facial and ear alopecia, exfoliative dermatitis, purulent keratoconjunctivitis, lymphadenomegaly, weight loss and lethargy (Fig.

The sire and pups with clinical signs of CanL were treated with allopurinol (Alloril 100; Dexcell, Israel) at 10 mg/kg by mouth twice daily. The dogs were examined clinically at follow-ups during the treatment period, when serological and PCR tests were repeated.

Allopurinol, which was administered to all clinically affected dogs, resulted in an improvement in dermatological abnormalities within 3 weeks. All affected pets were maintained on allopurinol treatment, and the owner of each pup was advised that their dog should wear an insecticide-impregnated collar to prevent sand fly bites, and to repeat their dog’s blood tests every 6 months for

This report provides a rare description of CanL with the very early onset of clinical signs in a litter of pups. Four of the nine pups had typical facial dermatitis at 2 and 2.5 months of age and a fifth pup showed facial dermatitis at 3.5 months of age, with some pups more severely affected than others. While all the apparently healthy pups were seronegative, two clinically affected PCR-positive pups were also seronegative. This is an interesting finding, as in utero infection may result in the modulation of anti-parasite immune responses in the fetus and neonate [

The onset of clinical CanL after exposure to infectious sand fly bites is usually slow, and the appearance of clinical signs under natural conditions has been reported to take place only after a long time lag from infection. In one study where 43 naive dogs were exposed to infectious sand flies in an endemic area in southern Italy, the first dog showed clinical signs of leishmaniosis 10 months after exposure [

This early age at which the pups showed clinical disease in conjunction with the confirmation of the disease in both parents and in the sire’s semen, and the fact that the pups were born and found to have leishmaniosis in the winter, which is a season when sand flies are not active in Israel [

Although the results of the present study are suggestive of vertical transmission, it is challenging to prove this because the litter was born in a country where leishmaniosis is endemic and the pups could have been exposed to infectious sand fly bites. Despite this, it is difficult to explain how clinical signs of leishmaniosis were present in 2- to 2.5-month-old pups when other studies have shown that when the disease develops following sand fly transmission it requires a substantially longer time to present clinically [

Similar to findings reported by others [

Three dogs, the dam of the litter and two of her pups (nos. 8 and 9), none of which had clinical signs suggestive of leishmaniosis, and all of which were

Overall, the pups in the present study can be divided into groups according to their response to infection: (i) apparently healthy, seronegative, PCR positive (nos. 8 and 9); (ii) clinically affected, seronegative, PCR positive (nos. 4 and 7); (iii) clinically affected, seropositive, PCR positive (nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6) (Fig.

All the affected dogs recovered clinically within 3 months after the commencement of allopurinol treatment (Table

In conclusion, we describe a cluster of clinical leishmaniosis amongst a sire and seven of nine littermates, and subclinical