While many resources are devoted to treating late stages of type 2 diabetes, when anti-hyperglycaemic therapy usually has limited effect on disease progression, individuals with prediabetes, who have the greatest opportunities for reversal

Current guidelines also emphasize the need to investigate treatment efficacy in different subgroups of patients

We have recently found that sulforaphane, an isothiocyanate previously studied for cancer prevention

We hypothesized that BSE can be effective as an early intervention in treatment-naive individuals with impaired fasting blood glucose and tested this hypothesis in a double-blind randomized trial. The rationale for focusing on individuals with impaired fasting glucose is that sulforaphane directly suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis

The inclusion criteria were impaired fasting glucose (6.1–6.9 mmol l

The participants were randomized to receive sulforaphane-containing BSE (150 μmol once daily) or placebo for 12 weeks (Table

Demographic and baseline characteristics of participants in the study

Plus–minus values are means ± s.d. LDL, low-density lipoprotein; HDL high-density lipoprotein.

Number of individuals randomized and assigned to BSE and placebo, respectively. In addition to the reasons provided for study discontinuation, a full list of reported adverse events for all participants is presented in Table

Reported adverse events in study participants

Adverse events were reported at the final visit or during a telephone follow-up. Data from discontinued participants are only from telephone follow-up, as they did not attend the final visit. Each participant may report several adverse events. Nausea, loose stools, diarrhoea, vomiting and gastro-intestinal reflux are collectively referred to as gastro-intestinal side effects in the text.

The participants who were assigned to BSE had a larger average reduction of fasting blood glucose than those receiving placebo, with a mean difference of 0.2 mmol l

Effect of BSE on primary and secondary endpoints

Changes relative to the baseline in primary and secondary endpoints in response to the BSE or placebo, respectively, in the full analysis set (

There was no difference in the change of BMI, HOMA-IR, HOMA estimate of beta-cell function (HOMA-B; reflecting insulin secretion), glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c), insulin clearance, fatty liver index, plasma cholesterol, serum triglyceride concentration, physical activity or dietary pattern between the groups (Table

We next investigated whether specific clinical and pathophysiological characteristics were associated with the metabolic response to BSE by post hoc exploratory analyses. A data-driven cluster analysis of newly diagnosed patients has recently identified five subgroups of diabetes with different clinical features, pathophysiology and disease progression

The response to BSE (change in fasting glucose relative to baseline) differed between participants of the various clusters (Supplementary Table

We also obtained stool samples before and after treatment with BSE or placebo for whole-genome sequencing. Principal coordinate (PCo) analysis of Bray–Curtis dissimilarity at the species level showed similar gut microbiota composition at baseline in the randomization groups, with no compositional change in response to treatment (Extended Data Fig.

Although participants with MARD-like characteristics had a larger average glycaemic response to BSE than those with SIRD- and MOD-like characteristics, all individuals with MARD-like characteristics did not respond equally well (Extended Data Fig.

In particular, the metagenome of pronounced responders had increased abundance of

By contrast, participants with a less pronounced response had significantly higher abundance of lactate producers, with increased facultative anaerobes and oral pathogens, including members of

Interestingly,

We also identified several other genes that differed significantly between pronounced responders and the remainder (Supplementary Fig.

To further investigate the influence of BT2160 on the clinical effect of BSE, we analysed sulforaphane concentration in serum after BSE treatment. The sulforaphane concentration had a bimodal distribution in the BSE-treated participants (with a mean concentration of 0.2 nmol ml

We next contrasted participants who had an abundance of BT2160 below and above the median, respectively, and compared the glycaemic response between pathophysiological clusters in each stratum of BT2160 abundance. In participants with BT2160 abundance above the median, those with MARD characteristics had a significantly larger glycaemic response compared with the other clusters, with a mean difference of 0.7 mmol l

We also observed in a post hoc analysis that the 11 study participants who achieved remission of impaired fasting glucose after BSE treatment (fasting glucose below 6.1 mmol mol

Finally, to evaluate the combined importance of clinical variables and bacterial species to the variation in the response among all BSE recipients, considering also nonlinear effects, we used machine learning based on decision trees (Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost)) and a distance-based redundancy analysis. The analyses showed that baseline alkaline phosphatase (ALP), GGT and triglycerides were associated with the glycaemic response to BSE (Extended Data Fig.

This trial shows that the response to sulforaphane-containing BSE in individuals with impaired fasting glucose differs based on the host pathophysiology and gut microbiota. In the full cohort, the 0.2 mmol l

Participants with a pronounced response to BSE had increased abundance of the butyrate producer

A particularly interesting difference between the pronounced responders and the remainder was the increased abundance in pronounced responders of the BT2160 operon that converts inactive glucosinolate to bioactive sulforaphane. Participants with high serum concentration of sulforaphane had also increased abundance of BT2160 in their gut microbiota. Moreover, the abundance of BT2160 was associated with improved glycaemic response in participants with MARD-like characteristics, with a significant interaction between the abundance of the operon and pathophysiological cluster.

While several stratification methods of potential relevance for diabetes have been proposed, the method used here has the advantage of including variables that can be obtained in clinical routine, as opposed to subgroups based on genetic risk variants or extensive clinical profiling

MARD represents a mild form of diabetes, and future longitudinal studies will have to show what percentage of individuals with MARD-like characteristics and prediabetes develop overt diabetes. While it is likely that individuals with features of SIRD are more prone to severe disease progression, MARD is nevertheless the largest cluster of patients, representing 35–50% of all with diagnosed disease in various cohorts

Although no previous studies have investigated the differential treatment effect in prediabetic subgroups, it is of interest that patients with type 2 diabetes and MARD characteristics were reported to have lower glycaemic response to metformin compared with other subgroups

A meta-analysis that identified the association between fasting glycaemia and risk of future diabetes

The strengths of the study are the usage of a non-pharmaceutical plant-sourced compound as a treatment modality for prediabetes, the randomized placebo-controlled design, the investigation of the differential effect in pathophysiological subgroups of diabetes treatment-naive individuals and the analysis of microbiome profiles associated with the anti-hyperglycaemic response to BSE. The association between the abundance of the BT2160 transcriptional regulator in the gut microbiota and the glycaemic response to BSE (in addition to the individual pathophysiology) suggests a model for how the microbiota and host pathophysiology interact to influence treatment response that may have general implications for precision medicine.

The study also has a number of limitations. The follow-up time of 12 weeks does not allow for the analysis of long-term effects on glycaemic control, and future prospective studies will have to determine the rates of overt diabetes in the treatment groups. The CIs for the change of primary and secondary variables were not adjusted for multiple comparisons. Other study limitations are the discontinuation of 15 study participants with an overall higher frequency of gastro-intestinal side effects (without any systematic differences in baseline characteristics; Supplementary Table

In summary, the trial shows that the response to sulforaphane-containing BSE in individuals with impaired fasting glucose differs based on the individual pathophysiology and gut microbiota. In the full cohort, the effect of BSE did not reach the prespecified outcome of 0.3 mmol l

The trial complies with all relevant ethical regulations, and the protocol was approved by the Regional Ethics Committee of Gothenburg (433-18). It started in December 2018 and was conducted as a randomized parallel-arm placebo-controlled double-blind trial in Gothenburg, Sweden (ClinicalTrials.gov

A random selection of members of the general population aged 35–75 years in Gothenburg, Sweden, and surrounding municipalities, who had registered addresses and Swedish personal numbers, received an invitation letter with study information and instructions on how to book a time for a screening visit. Gender was determined based on self-report and the official personal number. Participants received travel reimbursement but no other financial compensation.

Individuals were eligible to be included in the trial if all of the following criteria applied:

Impaired fasting glucose, defined as fasting blood glucose at 6.1–6.9 mmol l

Written informed consent

Age 35–75 years; participating women of fertile age must have no current pregnancy, which was assessed by a pregnancy test

BMI 27–45 kg m



Diabetes mellitus based on previous documentation or treatment with anti-hyperglycaemic medication or diagnosed according to the World Health Organization criteria (random plasma glucose >11.1 mmol l

Anti-diabetic medication

Active liver disease

At screening or at any subsequent visit, a level of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of more than three times the upper limit of the normal range

Gastro-intestinal ailments that may interfere with the ability to adequately absorb sulforaphane

At screening visit, creatinine >130 µmol l

Coagulation disorder or current anti-coagulant therapy, which may be affected by BSE

Diagnosed with a cardiovascular disease or known cardiovascular event, transient ischaemic attack, coronary by-pass surgery or other coronary vessel intervention within 6 months before enrolment

Systemic glucocorticoid treatment

Herbal treatment, defined as food supplement (except multivitamin treatment) with herbal or vegetable extracts that may affect blood glucose

Participant unable to understand the study information

Participation in another clinical trial, which may affect the outcome of the present study

Any other physical or psychiatric condition or treatment that in the judgement of the investigator makes it difficult to participate in the study

All participants signed a written informed consent before study procedures were initiated. Participants were instructed not to conduct intense physical activity or drink alcohol 24 h before the study visits. They were also instructed to fast starting midnight and not use nicotine on the same day.

At the screening visit, the height and weight of each participant were measured and venous blood samples were drawn for analysis of glucose, creatinine, AST, ALT, GGT, ALP, bilirubin, prothrombin complex and thrombocytes. Blood samples were drawn at 7.30–10.00 a.m.

Individuals with fasting blood glucose between 6.1 and 6.9 mmol l

Individuals who had fasting blood glucose between 6.1 and 6.9 mmol l

The randomized participants were instructed to take BSE or placebo once daily in the morning. Concordance with treatment was noted in a diary and also checked at the final visit by counting the remaining doses. Study personnel contacted the participants by phone 2–4 weeks after the initiation of treatment to discuss concordance with treatment and side effects.

The third visit was scheduled on the same weekday as visit 2 (unless it was not possible because of public holidays) 12 weeks after the first dose of the study medication. At this visit, body weight was measured, stool samples were collected and fasting venous blood samples drawn for analysis of primary, secondary and safety variables.

Physical activity was assessed using the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ), and dietary habits were assessed using items that had been validated in Swedish national health questionnaires

The randomization (in a 1:1 ratio between BSE and placebo) was generated by independent statisticians using a computer-based block randomization algorithm with balanced blocks. Allocation was concealed (via sealed envelopes) from the participants and study personnel until the end of the study. Thus, the generation of the random sequence, participant enrolment by study personnel and the allocation to randomization groups were clearly separated.

BSE containing high amounts of the sulforaphane precursor glucoraphanin was provided by Lantmännen R&D. BSE is a dried powder of an aqueous extract of broccoli sprouts that provides a consistent and stable source of sulforaphane. The active formulation contained BSE with maltodextrin added as a bulking agent, whereas maltodextrin alone was used as placebo. The placebo looked, smelled and tasted similar to the active compound and had the same constituents except BSE. Study doses were provided as dry mixtures in sealed, non-transparent portion-size bags. Each BSE dose delivered 150 μmol of sulforaphane. Sulforaphane content was determined using reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography by Eurofins. No sulforaphane was detected in the placebo. The mixtures of BSE and placebo were suspended with approximately 1 dl water and ingested orally once daily in the morning.

Safety studies of BSE in healthy volunteers have revealed no evidence of systematic, clinically significant adverse effects

Venous blood samples were taken between 7.30 and 10.00 in the morning. Fasting blood glucose from venous samples was measured at the study centre using a HemoCue Glucose System (HemoCue AB). All other blood analyses were performed at the central hospital laboratory (Gothenburg, Sweden). Homeostasis model assessment-2 estimates of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and beta-cell function (HOMA-B) were determined as previously described

The primary variable was fasting blood glucose, and the primary objective was to test the hypothesis that BSE improves fasting blood glucose using intraindividual comparisons before (baseline) and after treatment in the BSE group relative to the placebo group. The secondary variables were the change from baseline in HbA1c, BMI, insulin resistance (measured by HOMA-IR), insulin secretion (measured by HOMA-B), fasting blood lipids and a fatty liver index based on BMI, waist circumference, triglycerides and GGT

Participants completed the IPAQ, which assesses intense and moderate physical activity as well as walking during the past 7 days (ref.

Dietary habits were assessed using a food frequency questionnaire previously used in public health surveys. The self-reported frequency of intake of vegetables, lentils and root vegetables; fruit and berries; fish and shellfish; sausages; chocolate and sweets; cakes, buns and cookies; cheese; and sugared beverages was recorded and scored according to a reference indicator from the National Food Administration

The data-driven clustering based on diabetes-relevant traits was conceived in the All New Diabetics In Scania (ANDIS) cohort

The alignment of study participants with the clusters was performed using the baseline data of each participant. GADA was not measured in this study, but all participants were assumed to have non-autoimmune diabetes based on disease history (type 1 diabetes was an exclusion criterion in the study). The clustering was based on bootstrapping. In every round, the 8,980 individuals used to analyse the original clusters in ref.

As age at diagnosis of diabetes is used to cluster diabetes patients

The clustering was also performed using baseline data in a separate cohort of individuals taking part in a longitudinal study to examine the influence of lifestyle on diabetes progression (ClinicalTrials.gov

All study participants collected their own faecal samples at room temperature before visit 2 and 3. The faecal samples were delivered on the same day of sampling to the study centre, where they were stored at −80 °C. To use the samples to the largest extent possible, they were analysed even for participants who had non-complete clinical follow-up data. Total genomic DNA was isolated from 100–150 mg of faecal material using a modification of the International Human Microbiome Standards DNA extraction protocol Q7 (ref.

The metagenomic reads were quality filtered and trimmed using fastq_quality_trimmer from the fastX toolkit (

The BT2156–BT2160 protein sequences were downloaded from RefSeq (WP_008763945- WP_00876394) and mapped against

PCo analysis was performed on Bray–Curtis dissimilarity at the species level, calculated based on species abundances, and significance was determined by PERMANOVA test using the adonis2 function with 10,000 permutations. Significantly differential abundant species tables were obtained using the deseq2 package with adjustment for subjects at different visits. The

We used XGBoost, an ensemble machine learning technique based on decision trees, to identify continuous baseline variables that predict the change in fasting glucose after treatment of the study drugs. The method develops a multivariable ensemble of prediction models that were used to identify the strongest predictors of response. The optimal values for hyperparameters for each outcome were detected by performing a grid search on several possible combinations of different variables. The hyperparameters include the number of trees, learning rate, minimal loss to expand on a leaf node, maximum tree depth and subsample proportion. All other parameters were used at their default values. The package XGBoost version 1.6.0.1 was used in R 4.1.0.

We computed the relative importance of each variable predicting the outcome using

The concentration of sulforaphane in serum samples from participants was measured as previously described

The primary endpoint was the intraindividual change in fasting glucose from baseline in response to BSE or placebo, which was analysed using a linear model adjusted for BMI and variation in HOMA-IR. The comparison of fasting glucose was also complemented with an ANCOVA model. Secondary endpoints included the intraindividual change in secondary variables from baseline in response to BSE or placebo and were analysed using a linear model as for the primary endpoint. Normality was verified for the major clinical variables using normal probability plots.

The full analysis set includes all participants who have clinical measures after randomization, independent of concordance with treatment.

In view of observations in patients with type 2 diabetes that serum triglyceride concentration is associated with the response to BSE, individuals below or above the median serum triglyceride concentration were also analysed separately.

The data-driven clustering method was published after the design of this study, and the investigation of clusters is a post hoc analysis. The primary and secondary variables were compared between BSE and placebo within each cluster of participants using corresponding linear models as applied to the full cohort. The interaction between treatment and subgroup was analysed by a linear model with one term for treatment (BSE or placebo), one term for the subgroup and an interaction term for the treatment and subgroup. Baseline variables were compared between the three clusters using ANOVA followed by Bonferroni corrections to obtain an overall

The interaction between the abundance of BT2160 (log values) and pathophysiological subgroup (MARD versus MOD and SIRD) was analysed by a linear model with one term for BT2160 abundance, one term for subgroup and an interaction term for BT2160 and subgroup with the change of fasting glucose in response to BSE as the dependent variable. The analysis was adjusted for variation in body surface area between participants using the standard Du Bois formula.

The study was designed to have 80% power to detect a treatment effect of 0.3 mmol l

Two-sided

Further information on research design is available in the



Supplementary Tables 1–6, Figs. 1–8 and notes.

Reporting Summary

Study protocol and statistical analysis plan.

Statistical source data for supplementary tables and figures.



Statistical source data for Fig. 1.

Statistical source data for Fig. 2 with (a) cluster designation in the study cohort, (b) cluster designation in the replication cohort, (c) principal coordinates of Bray–Curtis dissimilarities and (d,e) altered taxa.

Statistical source data for Fig. 3 with principal coordinates of Bray–Curtis dissimilarities for participants with a pronounced and less pronounced response, respectively, and significantly altered taxa.

Statistical source data for Table 1 with baseline variables.

Statistical source data for Table 2 with reported adverse events.

Statistical source data for Table 3 with outcome variables at baseline and after treatment.

Source data for Extended Data Fig. 1 with outcome variables before and after treatment in all participants.

Source data for Extended Data Fig. 2 with outcome variables before and after treatment in all participants.

Source data for Extended Data Fig. 3 with outcome variables before and after treatment in participants with MARD-like characteristics.

Source data for Extended Data Fig. 4 with outcome variables before and after treatment in participants with MARD-like characteristics.

Source data for Extended Data Fig. 5 with principal coordinates at baseline and after treatment.

Source data for Extended Data Fig. 6 with baseline variables used to predict the change in fasting glucose in response to BSE.