Many Gram-negative bacterial pathogens, such as enteropathogenic



The T3SS injectisome of EPEC and the encoding operons in the engineered SIEC strains.

The assembly of the injectisome in EPEC is assisted by the lytic transglycosylase EtgA, a periplasmic enzyme encoded in the

Owing to their protein translocation capabilites, T3SSs have great potential in biomedical applications for the delivery of therapeutic proteins into mammalian cells [

In this study, we aimed to increase the translocation efficiency of SIEC by expressing EtgA. To achieve this, we generated a new strain, SIEC-eEtgA, which has the

It has been reported that forced overexpression of the transglycosylase EtgA severely affects the viability of

The secretion into the culture medium of the filament protein EspA and the translocon proteins EspB and EspD indicates the correct assembly of functional injectisomes [



Secretion of translocator proteins EspA, EspB, EspD and hemolytic activity by SIEC-eEtgA.

We further evaluated the enhanced assembly of injectisomes in SIEC-eEtgA by comparing its hemolytic capacity with that of the parental SIEC strain. Injectisome translocon proteins form pores on erythrocyte membranes, which trigger hemolysis [

We previously reported that the expression of injectisomes in SIEC reduces the secretion of the major flagellar component, flagellin FliC, and suppresses bacterial motility [



Motility and viability of EcM1-eEtgA and SIEC-eEtgA.

We also found that the growth curves of the strains EcM1, EcM1-eEtgA, SIEC and SIEC-eEtgA were superimposable (Fig.

In contrast to our results, the overexpression of EtgA in the BL21(DE3) strain of

During the infection process, EPEC injects more than 24 effectors into enterocytes to subvert cell functions. One of these effectors is the translocated intimin receptor (Tir) [



Translocation of Tir into mammalian cells by SIEC-eLEE5-eEtgA.

Given that EtgA increases the assembly of injectisomes in SIEC, we next investigated whether it also enhances protein translocation into mammalian cells. To do this, we performed a quantitative protein translocation assay based on the activity of translocated β-lactamase (Bla) in the cytosol of mammalian cells (Fig.



β-Lactamase translocation is enhanced in SIEC-eEtgA.

SIEC is a non-pathogenic

The strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table



Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study

Standard methods of DNA manipulation and cloning by digestion with restriction enzymes and ligation were applied to construct the different plasmids [



Oligonucleotides used in this study

The chromosomal integration of the

The control strain SIEC-eLEE5Δ

To induce the T3SS components in the different strains, O/N cultures were diluted 1:100 in capped Falcon tubes with 5 ml of LB containing 0.1 mM IPTG, and incubated at 37 °C with agitation (160 rpm) for 6 h. Two milliliters of each induced culture was centrifuged at 6000×

The hemolytic capacity of the

The motility of

The human cell line HeLa (CCL-2, ATCC) was infected with different SIEC-eLEE5-derived strains for actin pedestal observation. HeLa cells were seeded in 24-well tissue plates (10

Protein translocation quantification was assessed using the LiveBLAzer™ FRET B/G Loading Kit with CCF2-AM (ThermoFisher Scientific). Briefly, HeLa cells were seeded 2 days prior to the experiment in a tissue culture-treated 96-well black plate with a flat clear bottom (Corning) at 10