Arsenite [As(III)] is toxic, but its toxicity
varies depending
on its chemical form, with inorganic As(III) being particularly harmful.
As(III) naturally exists in various parts of the world, and it has
been reported that over 140 million people drink arsenic-contaminated
water daily.

Recently, whole-cell
biosensors have been developed for detecting
environmental contaminants due to their robustness, eco-friendliness,
and cost-effectiveness.

We recently discovered that LuxR, a quorum-sensing regulator in

Although this As(III)-induced LuxR aggregation-based
functional
switch sensor had a novel operational principle distinct from conventional
As(III)-induced ArsR conformational change sensors, it was limited
by its high response threshold of 133.5 μM for extracellular
As(III) concentration. To address this limitation, LuxR aggregation
must be triggered at a lower extracellular As(III) concentration than
133.5 μM. By effectively promoting the binding reaction between
As(III) and LuxR within the cell, it is possible to achieve LuxR aggregation
and functional switching at even lower extracellular As(III) concentrations,
thereby enhancing the sensitivity of the As(III) sensor.

In
this study, we developed a novel whole-cell As(III) sensor with
high sensitivity to lower concentrations of As(III) by suppressing
the expression of the As(III) exporter ArsB encoded in the

ArsB, which promotes As(III) efflux in

Enhanced sensitivity of LuxR sensor to arsenite
(As(III)) in the
ArsB-deficient mutant strain. (a) Schematic model of LuxR aggregation-induced
transcriptional OFF-switch in response to intracellular As(III) levels.
LuxR is a transcriptional activator of the

Compared to the wild-type MG1655 strain, which
harboring ArsB,
the sensitivity of the whole-cell As(III) sensor was enhanced, showing
an OFF-type As(III) response curve with a minimum As(III)-responsive
fluorescence output value of 5 × 10

To enable high-sensitivity
As(III) response using LuxR, which exhibits aggregation properties
in the presence of As(III), the

Response of ArsR-fused
LuxR sensors to As(III). (a) Model of intracellular
arsenic metabolism regulation by ArsR-LuxR and ArsR

First, we examined whether ArsR-LuxR, with wild-type
ArsR fused,
exhibits As(III) response similar to that of LuxR alone, and whether
ArsR

When the transcriptional
repression ability of ArsR was evaluated
by introducing the pArs-mCherry plasmid as a reporter, mCherry expression
was gradually observed from an extracellular As(III) concentration
of 0.1335 μM in the ArsR-LuxR strain, reaching a plateau at
13.35 μM, indicating that ArsR dissociated from DNA in response
to As(III) (

To evaluate the sensitivity differences between ArsR-LuxR
strain
and ArsR

By constructing
a single plasmid-based expression system combining
ArsR

The ArsR

In

Intracellular
As(III) levels in response to extracellular As(III)
concentrations for ArsR

The results from both strains revealed that the
amount of arsenic
a single

Next, we replotted
the response output of each strain at each extracellular
As(III) concentration (

In summary, when
plotted against extracellular As(III) concentrations,
the As(III) concentration at which each strain exhibited the minimum
response output differed by an order of magnitude. However, when the
horizontal axis was converted to intracellular As(III) concentrations,
the amount of As(III) per cell corresponding to the minimum output
was consistent for both strains, at 25–30 ag/cell. Although
the shapes of the intracellular As(III) response curves leading to
the minimum fluorescence output differed between the two strains,
the reason for this difference remains unverified and cannot be addressed
at this time. Nonetheless, these results suggest that the upper limit
of As(III) uptake per cell is 25–30 ag/cell. The intracellular
arsenic concentration obtained in this study, when converted based
on the assumption that the volume of a single

The LuxR sensor we previously reported was an insoluble-type sensor,
in which more than half of the expressed LuxR protein precipitated
by reacting with As(III) under conditions of 133.5 μM As(III)
concentration.

Reduction in the effective concentration of ArsR-LuxR and ArsR

After culturing

Next, we
demonstrated the aggregation of LuxR in response to As(III)
using fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS), which detects aggregates
through changing the fluorescent brightness in addition to the diffusion
coefficient of fluorescent molecules.

As(III)-dependent
aggregation of the sensor ArsR-LuxR and ArsR

In this study, we developed a novel sensor
system by engineering
a single plasmid capable of expressing both LuxR, an As(III) aggregation-based
sensor previously reported, and the intracellular As(III) metabolism
regulator ArsR, for portable introduction into various

The behavior of this aggregation-based sensor parallels findings
from Lindquist and colleagues, who demonstrated that protein aggregation
can drive functional switches, as observed in their studies on yeast
prions. Specifically, they reported that the yeast prion [

However, unlike the amyloid oligomers of the yeast
prion Sup35,
the LuxR aggregation induced by As(III) is characterized by disordered,
amorphous aggregation. Due to this nature, even when ArsR

Furthermore, as Lindquist and colleagues
proposed that [

The LuxR reading frame fused with
a histidine hexamer at the C-terminus was inserted into the

For the
quantitative assay, MG1655 harboring pLux-sfgfp, pArs-mCherry and
LuxR, ArsR-LuxR or ArsR

The resultant
plasmids were introduced into MG1655 harboring pLux-sfgfp. The transformants
were incubated overnight in 2 mL of LB medium. A 100 μL aliquot
of the culture was added to 10 mL of fresh LB medium that included
appropriate antibiotics, 10 μM AHL and varying concentrations
of As(III) (0–133.5 μM), and incubated at 37 °C
for 12 h with shaking. After the incubation, the cells at a concentration
of 10

The resultant plasmids
were introduced into MG1655 harboring pLux-sfgfp. The transformants
were incubated overnight in 2 mL of LB medium. A 100 μL aliquot
of the culture was added to 10 mL of fresh LB medium that included
appropriate antibiotics, 10 μM AHL and varying concentrations
of As(III) (0–133.5 μM), and shaken at 37 °C for
12 h. Subsequently, the cells were centrifuged at 3000

A histidine
hexamer was fused in frame to the C-terminus of the reading frames
of sensor proteins. The lysate was rigorously centrifuged (20,817

Fluorescence
correlation spectroscopy measurements were performed using an LSM
510 META + ConfoCor 3 system with a C-Apochromat 40 × 1.2NA Korr.
UV–vis-IR water immersion objective (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany),