TCSs are ubiquitous signaling pathways in bacteria that enable them to sense and respond to environmental stimuli.

In

To test this hypothesis, we used a combination of bioinformatics, genetic, and phenotypic approaches to investigate the distribution, function, and regulatory mechanisms of

The strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in

Strains and Plasmids Used in This Study

To explore the presence of

The shuttle plasmids, pKOR1 and pLI50, were acquired from Addgene (plasmids #13573 and #133446). Deletion mutants of

PCR Primers are Used for PCR Assays

MICs of oxacillin, ampicillin, gentamicin, linezolid, vancomycin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, erythromycin, clindamycin, teicoplanin, tigecycline, and rifampicin were determined using the microdilution broth method. All antimicrobial susceptibility testing and interpretive criteria were performed in accordance with the breakpoints specified in the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines (CLSI, 2023).

Age-matched (6-week-old) female wild-type (WT) BALB/c mice were purchased from Yangzhou University with a permit and used in this study. Mice were randomly divided into four groups (n=10 per group).

Forty 6-week-old female BALB/c mice were randomly divided into four groups, with ten mice in each group. After preparing the bacterial suspensions as described above, 100 µL of 1×10

The nasal tissue colonization experiment was conducted with modifications to previously described methods.

Log-phase

PIA was quantified with minor modifications as previously described.

Isolation and quantification of eDNA were performed as previously described.

To determine the effect of

All experimental data were analyzed by unpaired Student’s

We retrieved 15,626

The Presence of desKR in Different STs

Prevalence and genomic context of the two-component regulatory system

The

DesK was predicted to be a membrane-anchored protein characterized by five transmembrane (TM) domains, which are crucial for spanning the cell membrane (

Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool (SMART) and Swiss-MODEL Analysis of DesKR. (

DesR, the response regulator, is composed of two main domains: an REC (Receiver) domain (residues 2–115) and a LuxR-type Helix-Turn-Helix (HTH) domain (residues 137–194) (

To further investigate the biological function of

MIC Determination of Antibiotics for NCTC8325 and ΔdesKR

To investigate the influence of

Impacts of

Given that

To rule out the possibility that the

Adhesion to biological and non-biological surfaces is the first step in the formation of

Impacts of

To further elucidate the changes in biofilm formation at higher resolutions, CLSM analysis was employed. To differentiate between live and dead cells within the biofilm, we utilized a fluorescent dye staining technique, wherein SYTO9 dye was used to stain live bacteria green, whereas propidium iodide dye penetrated the membranes of dead cells, causing them to appear red. As illustrated in

To investigate whether promotion of

PIA and eDNA are important components of

Impacts of

Cell lysis is a critical pathway for the release of eDNA, which plays a key role in biofilm development. The autolysis assay offers valuable insights into whether

To investigate the mechanism by which

RT-qPCR detection of the impacts of

The emergence and rapid spread of antibiotic-resistant

Protein structural analysis revealed that DesKR possesses the typical structural features of a two-component regulatory system, including the transmembrane domain of HK, His dimerization phosphate acceptor domain, ATPase domain, and the receiver and effector domains of RR. These structural domains form the basis for signal transduction in the two-component regulatory system.

Two-component systems (TCSs) in bacteria, including

One of the most striking findings of our study was the significant effect of

Our study further revealed that

DesKR represents a promising target for the development of novel anti-biofilm therapies due to its key role in regulating biofilm formation. Recent studies have shown that small molecules can effectively inhibit TCSs like GraSR, which are involved in antibiotic resistance mechanisms.

Our study had certain limitations. Although our research indicated that

In conclusion, our study demonstrates that the

Schematic overview of the