The generation of bacterial mutants is integral to the continued advancement of research into bacterial physiology and pathogenesis. Such genetic manipulation requires the successful uptake and maintenance of exogenous DNA, a process hindered by natural resistance mechanisms including restriction modification systems that are widespread amongst bacterial pathogens. While deletion of these systems is frequently associated with improved DNA uptake and retention, this is a challenging process that also has the potential to impact diverse biological processes, and limits mutagenesis to only a small number of strains, excluding important clinical isolates. We have thus developed a protocol to transiently block the activity of Type I restriction modification systems, using the phage protein Ocr, that significantly improves bacterial uptake of exogenous DNA. Here we provide the details of generation of an expression plasmid pET19b-ocr, and a protocol for in-house expression and purification of recombinant Ocr protein, with the aim of enabling the improved efficiency of genetic manipulation of multiple bacterial pathogens at low cost and with no impact on bacterial behaviour.

Methodology for expression and purification of recombinant Ocr protein.

Validation of activity of in-house purified recombinant Ocr protein.

The authors confirm all supporting data, code and protocols have been provided within the article or through supplementary data files.

The development of new tools to facilitate the genetic manipulation of bacterial pathogens for the generation of clean mutants and large mutant libraries has been central to our improved understanding of bacterial physiology and virulence [

RMS facilitate the discrimination between self and non-self DNA, and specifically target non-self DNA for cleavage and degradation [

Phage have evolved a diverse array of strategies to counter bacterial RMS and facilitate infection, one example of which is the protein Ocr encoded by phage T7, a strongly negatively-charged DNA mimic that directly binds to and inhibits the activity of bacterial Type I RMS [

Improving the efficiency of DNA uptake by bacterial pathogens is essential to facilitate the continued success of molecular microbiological research, with key impacts on determining the virulence mechanisms of important and clinically-relevant pathogens. Here, we present the method for in-house generation of a cost-effective and highly active recombinant phage protein that inhibits the activity of Type I RMS, with the potential to promote DNA uptake by a diverse array of genetically recalcitrant bacterial strains. Detailed methods are provided below, and are summarised in

The expression vector pET19b-ocr was generated by ligating the

Recombinant Ocr protein was expressed in

Bacterial pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM ammonium chloride, pH8.0), and mechanically lysed by subjecting cells to high pressure (10 kpsi) (One Shot Cell Disruptor, Constant Systems). Mechanical lysis may also be performed using a sonicator [

Ocr is a small (13.8 kDa) strongly negatively charged protein (theoretical pI: 3.87) that acts as a DNA mimic. As such, the inclusion of any tag to facilitate recombinant protein purification has the potential to impair activity and block function. A purification method based on charge, and performed using anion exchange chromatography was therefore developed [

Bacterial lysates were applied to a HiTrap DEAE FF column (1 ml resin bed) (Cytiva), which had been pre-equilibrated with lysis buffer. The column was then washed with 5x CV of lysis buffer followed by 20 CV of wash buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate, 200 mM ammonium chloride, pH 8.0). Recombinant Ocr protein was then eluted in elution buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate, 600 mM ammonium chloride, pH8.0) in 1 ml fractions and quantified by UV absorption spectrophotometry using a Nanodrop (standard settings; 1 Abs=1 mg ml

The resulting protein was dialysed into dialysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 20 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT) using a 2 kDa MWCO dialysis cassette (Thermo). Total protein was quantified by Bradford Assay (VWR) and diluted into the same storage buffer used for commercial Ocr protein (

Assessment of Ocr activity can be performed by addition of the recombinant protein to any experimental protocol for DNA uptake by bacteria, where an active Type I RMS is present. We have previously reported that

Group A

Bacterial cells were transformed by electroporation (MicroPulser Electroporator, Biorad) with the following settings: 200 Ω, 1.7 kV, 50 µF, 0.1 cm cuvette. Cells were recovered in 1 ml Todd Hewitt broth (37 °C, static, 1 h) and plated on Todd Hewitt agar supplemented with spectinomycin (50 µg ml

Successfully transformed colonies were counted, and transformation efficiency calculated as bacterial cfu per microgram transformed plasmid DNA. In-house purified recombinant Ocr demonstrated equivalent activity to the commercially produced product (

Genetic manipulation of clinically important bacterial species is critical to our continued understanding of emerging pandemic threats, as well as the alarming rise of antimicrobial resistance. Despite this, research into certain species and lineages is hampered by a lack of tools to overcome the naturally-occurring resistance mechanisms employed by bacteria to protect themselves from the acquisition of exogenous DNA [

RMS are expressed by over 90 % of bacterial strains that have been sequenced to date [

Capitalising on natural RMS inhibition strategies employed by phage represents a largely un-tapped reservoir of proteins that could be used to block the activity of different classes of RMS, and fully alleviate the negative impact of these systems on the genetic manipulation of diverse bacterial species. By developing protein-based inhibition systems the blockade on activity will be transient, and while sufficient to facilitate DNA uptake, will not impact subsequent activity of the RMS or modify the behaviour of the bacteria in any way. Such an approach represents a universal strategy to expand the diversity of bacterial strains that can be successfully subjected to genetic manipulation.