All genomes described for the first time in this article are publicly available and were deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under BioProjects PRJNA678027 and PRJNA827950. Individual SRA, BioSample and BioProject accession numbers for all sequences used in the study can be found in Table S1. The data analysis and visualization scripts are also available at

This work is significant because it advances understanding of the epidemiology, population structure and evolution of



The role of MGEs, such as F virulence plasmids, genomic islands and phage-related elements in the evolution of

Due to the increased acknowledgement of the role of non-human (though often human-impacted) sources in a proportion of human ExPEC infections, the historically anthropocentric nature of ExPEC genomic epidemiology has moved towards a One Health perspective. Companion animals, particularly dogs, have also received attention, acknowledging the close interaction between humans and their pet dogs, and, by extension, the risk of sharing pathogens between them. Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are one of the primary reasons for dog owners to consult a veterinarian, and approximately 14 % of dogs will experience at least one bacterial UTI during their lifetime [

These data might give the impression that canine ExPEC are simply a subset of human ExPEC, present due to repetitive human-to-canine transfer, but the dominant ExPEC among dogs, ST372, is comparatively uncommon in humans. Multiple studies have identified ST372 as the most prevalent ST in dogs and although ST372 have been identified in human infections, their apparent frequency compared to other STs in humans is low [

Genome sequences belonging to 407 strains of

Sixty-eight of the genome sequences used were from a collection of 399 canine-origin

Sample swabs were streaked onto lysogeny broth (LB) agar plates and single colonies collected for culture in 10 ml liquid LB. Following overnight culture, total cellular DNA was extracted using the ISOLATE II Genomic DNA (Bioline) kit following the manufacturer’s standard protocol for bacterial cells and was stored at 4 °C. Library preparation was done by the Australian Institute for Microbiology and Infection Core Sequencing Facility at the University of Technology Sydney, following the adapted Nextera Flex library preparation kit process, Hackflex [

A modular analysis pipeline known as pipelord2, implemented with the Snakemake workflow management system, was used to perform primary bioinformatic analysis [

The presence of a ColV type plasmid was inferred using criteria previously described by Liu

The core and pan-genomes of the annotated

Scoary 1.6.16 was used to determine associations between fastbaps cluster membership and genes in the ST372 pan-genome [

Genomes that carried genes representative of genotypes identified in the GWAS analysis were selected. GenBank files were uploaded to IslandViewer 4 (

A custom R script was written in RStudio 1.4.1106 with R 4.1.3 to perform secondary analysis on the data generated by pipelord2 and the phylogenetic methods described above. The script also produces the publication figures, excepting some manual editing that was necessary for ease of viewing and interpretation. The genomic island sequences in Fig. S2-5 were visualized with SnapGene Viewer (version 5.0.7, GSL Biotech LLC).

The data analysis and visualization script is available at

Melbourne Veterinary Collection (MVC) genomes were deposited in GenBank and the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under BioProject PRJNA678027. Additional ST372 genome sequences from collaborators and gull sequences were deposited under BioProject PRJNA827950. Individual SRA, BioSample and BioProject accession numbers for all sequences used in the study can be found in Table S1.

The study collection comprised 407

Genomic epidemiological features of the ST372 genome collection. (

The maximum-likelihood core genome phylogeny was inferred from a 3 160 664 bp alignment of 3493 genes identified in all ST372 sequences. The resulting tree was grouped by fastbaps into 13 clusters, which were designated letters from A–M. Cluster M was the largest (202, 49.6 %) comprising mostly canine source sequences (120/202, 59.4 %) as well as most of the human sequences in the collection (56/72, i.e. 77.8 % of human total, and 56/202, i.e. 27.7 % of cluster M) (

Phylogeny of ST372. A maximum-likelihood core gene phylogeny based on alignment of 3493 genes identified in all ST372 sequences. Metadata displayed from inner to outermost rings display fastbaps cluster, source, continent, O:H type and

To obtain greater resolution of the potential overlap between canine and human or non-canine sourced sequences, we generated a pairwise SNP matrix of conserved variable sites extracted from the core gene alignment (22 504 total SNPs) and filtered pairs of strains that differed by 30 SNPs or less. Across the ~3.16 Mbp alignment this amounts to a core genomic divergence of ≤0.000949 % over 3493 genes. This analysis identified 77 unique pairs of closely related sequences from non-identical sources (

Low pairwise SNP distance heatmap between ST372 isolated from canine and non-identical sources. Metadata are represented for each sequence in coloured bars for each row and column. Each cell in the heatmap represents a pairwise SNP comparison between two sequences represented by white to purple gradient. Grey squares represent distances of >30 SNPs.

A pan-GWAS analysis was utilized to identify genes with putative functions associated with the previously defined phylogenetic clusters. We identified 76 genes that were over-represented in four clusters (

Map of cluster-associated genes aligned to the core gene phylogeny. Columns display metadata (cluster, source, O:H type) followed by genes found to be over-represented in clusters M, G, L and J. Gene presence/absence is indicated with the same colour as the associated cluster. Coloured dots next to gene names indicate where an alternative allele of the same gene is identified in another cluster. Bracketed labels indicate gene functions for select genes/operons.

The above results indicated that multiple genes of interest in ST372, particularly the

Schematic representations of representative gene loci containing cluster-associated genes (see

Analysis of genes found in the M2 and M3 genotypes revealed at least two genomic contexts for the K capsule and T2SS genes. In MVC18 (M2), all

Here we assembled a collection of all available

Despite our efforts to generate a genome collection from diverse sources, the collection was dominated (73.7 %) by isolates from dogs. Our findings and those of others strongly support ST372 as the major

The population structure, as defined by fastBAPS clusters, mostly corresponded with single O:H types. The largest cluster (cluster M), however, which mainly comprised O83:H31 strains (167/202, 82.7 %), also included O18:H31 (22/202, 10.9 %) and O45:H31 (5/202, 2.5 %). The O18:H31 and O45:H31 sequences were from multiple continents, exclusively of human source, and each split into their own clades at the most divergent end of the phylogeny. This suggests serotype-mediated host adaptation, though other genomic features are likely to have been involved, as discussed later. Flament-Simon

In support of the zoonotic potential of

We note that the present collection is heavily weighted towards clinical isolates from both dogs and humans, despite the fact that the gastrointestinal tract is the major reservoir of such isolates, wherein ST372 may reside for long periods before causing infection, or without ever causing infection. Given the fact that we identified close linkage between infectious isolates separated geographically and by unknown periods of gastrointestinal colonization time in different hosts, we suspect that contemporaneous, paired faecal isolates of ST372 from dogs and humans within the same household would exhibit outbreak-level similarity. As such, the level of core genomic similarity observed within this unlinked collection could be considered a globalized reflection of highly related strains, shared via repetitive within-household transmission of ST372 between humans and their pet dogs via shared living space, physical intimacy and shared diets. Whether diet is a point source of ST372 for dogs and humans remains unknown but may be important. Foodborne sources of ST372 that might drive carriage by dogs and humans are worthy of further investigation, though we note a low level of livestock sequences in this collection (

Whilst the short-term direct transfer of a pathogenic organism from a primary to a secondary host is a classical conception of zoonosis, the divergent evolution of a pathogen adapted to the secondary host from the primary host genotype over a longer time span should equally be considered a form of zoonosis. The latter scenario cannot be detected via traditional epidemiological approaches, but genomic epidemiology, which pairs core gene phylogeny, accessory gene content and host metadata, allows such inferences to be made. We believe that our data indicate that both zoonotic scenarios have occurred within the history of

What underlies the association of ST372 with dogs, and the development of human-associated ST372 lineages? The large pan-genome of

In the ST372 pan-genome we identified 40 accessory genes that were associated with the largest cluster, cluster M. Among these were genes of the

A proportion of sequences in cluster M contained genomic island-associated K capsule genes in two arrangements. The K antigen locus is phage-mobilized and has well-described functionality in human pathogenesis and possible roles in gut colonization, likely explaining the apparent selection of these genes in human-restricted clades of ST372 and in branches of the phylogeny immediately basal to these clades [

As was suggested earlier, O:H type might have a role to play in the selection of accessory genes in conjunction with the host. The human-restricted lineages of cluster M carried O:H types O45:H31 and O18:H31, in contrast to the remainder of cluster M, which carried O83:H31. Transition to human host in conjunction with a loss of O83:H31 might explain the loss of the

Our results indicate that dogs are the primary reservoir of ST372 and major contributors to the evolution of this lineage. The data support transfer of pathogenic isolates between dogs and humans and emergence of a human-adapted lineage from the canine-dominated population. We highlight two horizontally transferred genomic islands that are apparently associated with evolution and selection in dog and human hosts. Whilst these provide partial explanations for the success of

Click here for additional data file.

Click here for additional data file.