PerR is an autoregulated transcriptional repressor and is a member of the ferric uptake repressor (Fur) family of proteins (

In

Despite these previous findings on the role of

To determine the impact of a constitutively expressed PerR on

To confirm wild type PerR function in 630Δ

To evaluate the impacts of oxygen-responsive

Despite differences in PerR activity between 630Δ

To better understand genes involved in 630Δ

Despite differences in expression of

These data suggest that the increased viability of 630Δ

During infection,

There was no difference between the two strains in stool consistency scores nor

630Δ

Here, we restored a wild type copy of

To better understand the genes repressed by PerR (which likely contribute to increased O

Our RNA-seq data also show that large-scale changes to the

Our data also indicate that there is no difference between 630Δ

In summary, our work establishes that a constitutively de-repressed PerR regulon offers no fitness advantage at O

For

The

Illumina whole genome sequencing on DNA extracted (

Liquid cultures of 630, 630Δ

RNA was extracted by centrifuging samples at 3,000 xg for 5 minutes at 4°C. Pellets were washed with 5 mL cold, nuclease free PBS, and centrifuged at 3,000 xg for 5 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was removed, and remaining pellets were resuspended in 1 mL TRIzol and processed using a TRIzol Plus RNA Purification Kit (Thermo) with on-column DNase treatment. Purified RNA integrity was confirmed via 2100 Agilent BioAnalyzer and frozen at −80°C.

RNA-seq was performed by Microbial Genome Sequencing Center (MiGS) on high-quality rRNA-depleted RNA extracts (12 million paired end reads per sample). Quality control and adapter trimming was performed with bcl2fastq (version 2.20.0.445)(

The Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCA) plot was generated from the RNA-seq data in R using version 4.4.1. PCA was performed using

To identify a timepoint for RNA-seq at which

RT-qPCR was performed using GoTaq 1-Step RT-qPCR Master Mix (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with a concentration of 1 ng/μL RNA in a final volume of 10 μL. Each reaction was run with three technical replicates. The RT-qPCRs were performed on a QuantStudio 7 Flex (Applied Biosystems) and threshold cycle (Ct) was determined using QuantStudio Real-Time PCR Software v1.7.2. The cycle run involved a reverse transcriptase activation and inactivation step of 40°C for 15 minutes and 95°C for 10 minutes. The PCR cycle was 95°C for 10 sec, 60°C for 30 sec and 72°C for 30 sec for 40 cycles, with a melt curve performed afterwards. Relative fold change was determined by comparing the Ct values against the average Ct value at 0 minutes for each condition.

To quantify

All animal studies were done in strict accordance with the University of Wisconsin-Madison Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines (Protocol #M006305). CDI murine model was performed on age- and sex-matched, conventionally reared C57BL/6 in-house between 6 and 9 weeks of age. Mice were fed a fiber free (FF) diet (Inotiv TD.150689) one week before antibiotic exposure. Mice were given a single dose of clindamycin by oral gavage (1 mg/mouse; 200 μL of 5-mg/mL solution), and 24 hours later were given 200 μL 630Δ

At 7 dpi, mice were switched from the FF diet to a fiber rich standard rodent chow (Inotiv Teklad

Data on normalized transcript abundance and differential expression analysis are found in

All statistical analyses, except for the PERMANOVA, were performed using GraphPad Prism 9.4.1. PERMANOVA was performed as described in “PCA Generation and RNA-seq Data Analysis” section. Details of specific statistical analyses indicated in figure legends. For all figures, *