Compartmentalization was initially considered a defining feature of eukaryotic cells. With the advent of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) however, subcellular structures were also discovered in bacteria, including bacterial microcompartments (BMCs) such as carboxysomes in certain autotrophic taxa (

Ethanolamine (EA) accumulates in mammalians’ gastrointestinal and urinary tracts upon degradation of phosphatidylethanolamine. EA utilization confers competitive advantages to certain pathogenic bacteria in the gut environment (

The

Electron micrographs of

Overall, Eut BMCs play a safeguarding role by sequestering and favoring the downstream conversion of toxic and volatile acetaldehyde intermediates (

With these knowledge gaps in mind, we performed a systemic analysis from the molecular to the functional level of native BMC-mediated EA catabolism in

The EUT1 locus of

The

Bacterial strains and plasmids used in the study

Growth experiments were performed using a microplate reader to evaluate each strain’s EA utilization capacity. The W3110 strains (WT and Δ

Growth of

These experiments were performed using a microplate reader. Data are shown as mean (

The EUT1 locus encodes a functional EA utilization pathway but does it truly drive the production of Eut BMCs

The chimeric protein EutC-GFP forms distinct puncta in an EA-containing medium. (

No GFP fluorescence emission was detected in the absence of aTc (Fig. S2A). In M9 glycerol NH

We first used a traditional TEM-based approach to evaluate the integrity of the Eut BMCs

CryoET reconstructions of W3110 WT grown in M9 glycerol EA B12 revealed several cellular features including the inner and outer membranes, ribosomes, and Eut BMCs (

Since Eut BMCs are protein-based, we investigated how their production affects

EA utilization requires minimal reorganization of the proteome. W3110 WT cultures were grown aerobically in M9 glycerol EA B12 vs M9 glycerol NH

Some of the

Eleven ancillary proteins are encoded within the EUT1 locus (

The second identified module consisted of proteins involved in maintaining intracellular N homeostasis (

Overall, these results indicate that the production of Eut BMCs did not have a pleiotropic effect, since only proteins involved in BMC synthesis and N metabolism were affected.

To decipher the metabolic functioning of the Eut BMCs, we grew W3110 WT under aerobic conditions in M9 derivatives containing glycerol as a C source and either EA or NH

Growth parameters of

The exponential growth rate µ is expressed in h

The exometabolome was analyzed by one-dimension proton nuclear magnetic resonance (

We next performed flux balance analysis [FBA (

The model predicted that Eut BMCs produce and release equimolar quantities of acetaldehyde, ethanol, and acetyl-P into the cytosol, each accounting for 33% of the C from EA (Fig. S7). Acetaldehyde can potentially escape from the cytosol into the extracellular medium, as reported previously (

To test the predictions of the GSM, we performed a

The

Finally, we built a dynamic isotopic model to quantify

Regarding N metabolism, the isotopic model confirmed the ammonium overflow predicted by the GSM, with an ammonium production rate of 0.9 ± 0.2 mmol·g

These isotope labeling experiments thus confirm the main predictions of the GSM, namely that EA can be used as a C source for growth and that N overflow occurs under these conditions.

The presence of functional Eut BMCs in

We were able to visualize

We used fluorescence microscopy to observe Eut BMCs

How many Eut BMCs do the

This study also shows that the ability of

The protein complement of Eut BMCs remains unclear; however, our relative quantification of

EutQ was found to be highly abundant, ten times more abundant than EutP, the other

To our knowledge, the flux map reported here is the first to connect the Eut BMC with central metabolism

Could some ancillary EUT1 proteins play a role in EA utilization? We detected 7 out of the 11 ancillary EUT1 proteins by proteomics (TktB, TalA, MaeB, AmiA, YpeA, YfeY, and YfeX), none of them being differentially accumulated in M9 glycerol EA B12 vs M9 glycerol NH

By integrating our microscopy and fluxomics data, we calculated the mean EA conversion flux through an individual

Finally, we also found that EA served as an N source, with strong modifications in the levels of proteins involved in nitrogen metabolism. The ammonium generated by EA catabolism was mostly used for biomass production but the rest was excreted. The N:C molar ratio of EA (1:2) is higher than in the elemental composition of

The native

Cloning experiments were performed in lysogeny broth (LB). For the physiological characterizations, a nitrogen-free M9-medium was first assembled containing (final concentration in the medium): 17.4 g·L

After 16 h of incubation at 37°C under 200 rpm shaking, the bacteria were collected by centrifugation (4,000 ×

When mentioned, cultures were made in a plate format instead. In this case, transparent flat-bottom 96 well plates (Sarstedt, Germany) covered with lids and containing 100 µL medium per well were used. The culturing scheme was similar to that described for shake flasks. A CLARIOStar Plus (BMG LabTech, Germany) plate reader apparatus allowed for maintaining the cultures at 37°C under 200 rpm double orbital shaking. Absorbance at 600 nm was measured every 10 min to estimate growth. Results were analyzed with the MARS Data Analysis software (BMG LabTech, Germany).

Polymerase chain reactions (PCRs) for cloning purposes were performed using the high-fidelity Phusion DNA Polymerase (NEB, France). PCR products were purified with the NucleoSpin PCR Clean Up kit (Macherey Nagel, Germany), quantified with a NanoDrop 2000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, France), and assembled by In-Fusion (TaKaRa, Japan). After purification with the NucleoSpin Plasmid kit (Macherey Nagel, Germany), the generated plasmids were verified by Sanger Sequencing.

The system described by Jiang et al. was utilized in this study (

The

The linear backbone from pO (a modified version of pSEVA661 bearing a

Samples (equivalent to 0.6 µL culture at OD

Samples (equivalent to 1 mL of culture at OD

Samples (equivalent to 1 mL of culture at OD

For grid preparation, 3.4 µL of sample was deposited onto glow-discharged lacey carbon grids and placed in the thermostatic chamber of a Leica EM-GP automatic plunge freezer, set at 20°C and 95% humidity. The excess solution was removed by blotting with Whatman no. 1 filter paper for 2.5 s, and the grids were immediately flash-frozen in liquid ethane at −185°C.

For cryo-electron tomography, tilt-series were acquired on a Talos Arctica (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at 200 kV in parallel beam condition using either a K2 (for mutant cells) or K3 (for WT condition) Summit direct electron detector and a BioQuantum energy filter (Gatan Inc.) operated in zero-loss mode with a slit width of 20 eV. For WT cells, data collection was carried out using Tomo software (Thermo Fisher Scientific), at a nominal magnification of ×31,000 with a calibrated pixel size of 2.78 Å. For mutant cells, a nominal magnification of ×49,000 was used with a calibrated pixel size of 2.84 Å. In both conditions, tilt series were acquired following the dose symmetric scheme (

For tomogram reconstruction and segmentation, movie frames were aligned using MotionCor2 (

Dried protein extracts (40 µg) were solubilized with 25 µL of 5% SDS. Proteins were submitted to reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues by the addition of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and chloroacetamide to a final concentration, respectively, of 10 mM and 40 mM. Protein samples were then processed for trypsin digestion on S-trap Microdevices (Protifi) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, with the following modifications: precipitation was performed using 211 µL S-Trap buffer; 4 µg trypsin was added per sample for digestion, in 25 µL TEAB 50 mM pH 8.

Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 20 µL of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography (LC) coupled to tandem MS, using an UltiMate 3000 system (NCS-3500RS Nano/Cap System; Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Five microliters of each sample were loaded on a C18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter × 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a solvent made of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C18 column (75 µm inner diameter × 50 cm, in-house packed with Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 5%–50% gradient of solvent B over 115 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software. MS survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6. The 10 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation by high-energy collision-induced dissociation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 17,500, using an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum fill time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was used within 30 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.

Raw MS files were processed with the Mascot software (version 2.7.0) for database search and Proline (

The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier

The same cultures as for NMR analyses were used. Biomass (500 µL) was harvested at an OD

Glycerol and ethanolamine uptake fluxes, acetate, and ethanol production fluxes, and growth rates were calculated from glycerol, ethanolamine, acetate, ethanol, and biomass concentration–time profiles using PhysioFit (v1.0.1 [

The iML1515

To quantify intracellular fluxes during the growth of

The differential equations, which balance the concentrations of extracellular compounds (biomass, glycerol, ethanolamine, acetate, and ethanol) and intracellular compounds [AcP, AcCoA, ethanolamine, ethanol, acetate, glycerol, NAD(H), and ammonia], were completed with isotopic equations for parameter estimation. As detailed before (

The model was constructed and analyzed using COPASI (

All the detailed calculations are given in Data S2.