Bacteria are widespread and can cause severe disease in animals, including humans (

Determination of genetic and stochastic contributions to infection outcome requires a host organism amenable to genetic manipulation and high-throughput experimentation.

Variation in infection outcome between

Historically, a “go-to” method for non-invasive imaging in rodent models is bioluminescence (

Here, we report a new method employing the

A method for non-invasive tracking of pathogen load over time

(A) Previous methods for determining pathogen load require animal sacrifice. Larger cohorts are required for experiments as several flies must be sacrificed at the desired time points to check infection progression and clearance.

(B) This work presents a non-invasive method to track pathogen load over time using bioluminescence. Thus, all flies can be individually monitored over time, allowing for a more comprehensive view of immune response.

To employ bioluminescence as a reporter for pathogen count, we first measured how photon flux correlated with bacterial optical density (OD) in liquid culture (

Photon flux is monotonically related to bacterial concentration

(A)

(B) Wild-type flies were injected with different concentrations of

We then sought to determine how flux correlates with bacterial count when injected into living flies by comparing the flux measurements of infected flies to CFU measurements generated by the current gold standard method, dilution plating. The

To determine whether sexually dimorphic pigmentation of the cuticle affected this relationship, we also compared the best fit line of radiance/CFU of male and female flies. We found no differences between sexes (

To determine whether bioluminescence could be employed for longitudinal tracking of pathogen load over time, we monitored flies for infection progression over several days. Given the duration of the experiment, the flies required housing both compatible with imaging and including food to prevent starvation. To this end, flies were housed in black 96-well plates by preparing small aliquots of food for each well and placing a glass sheet overtop of the plate (

Bioluminescence can be used to track changes in pathogen load over time

(A) Representative well images for different concentrations of bacteria injected in wild-type flies over four days. Higher initial concentrations were cleared to low, but detectable concentrations. Low initial concentrations were cleared below the limit of detection for the imaging instrument. Well images are representative of 48 injected individuals, 12 biological replicates per infection concentration.

(B) Average clearance patterns for different concentrations of

(C) Individuals display varied routes toward infection clearance, suggesting stochasticity plays a role in infection dynamics. Black dotted line represents the average, and the gray band represents the standard deviation. The gray box shows the limit of detection of the imaging instrument. Solid lines represent routes individuals took toward infection clearance.

Because wild-type flies mount a robust immune response against

Clearance patterns varied among flies receiving the same dose of pathogen (

To ensure the decreasing photon counts over time in wild-type flies were because of infection clearance rather than loss of the

Historically, stochasticity of immune response in the first 12 h of infection has been laborious to measure because of the need for fly sacrifice to obtain pathogen load information. We hypothesized our bioluminescent imaging strategy would be useful for studying differences in pathogen clearance during these critical first hours of infection. To test this capability, we used two fly lines, Oregon-R wild-type flies and immunodeficient

Longitudinal tracking of individual flies is possible in wild-type and immune deficient genotypes

(A) Representative images of radiance measurements for wild-type (wt) and

(B) Comparison of population level integrated total flux. The box plots for each genotype at each time point show the median, first and third quartiles, and 1.5 times the inter-quartile range. Time points showing a significant difference (p < 0.05) in means between the two lines are demarked with an asterisk (Welch two-sample t-test). Immunodeficient lines received a 37% lower dose of infection than wt flies because of experimental variation. This significance was lost by hour 1, with

(C) Comparison of wt and

Beyond quality control, we can use variation in initial dose to answer biological questions. For example, it has been shown that, within a genotype, varying initial dose by orders of magnitude yields differences in bacterial load of chronic infections. However, previous work relies on group averages and is unable to assess the impact of more subtle variations in initial infection load (

Previous work also suggests that bacterial load on death is independent of initial load (

In the experiment above, the high initial dose of bacteria killed the immune-deficient flies in less than 9 h, which made it difficult to assess potential drivers of death (

Lower initial infection dose yields more variation in time of death of immune-deficient flies

Both wild-type (wt) and

(A) Representative images of radiance measurements for wt and

(B) Summary of integrated total flux values for the living wt and

(C) Histogram displaying time of death statistics for

To further explore the variation in the infection progression in immunodeficient flies, we plotted their individual dynamics (

Individual infection tracking of immune deficient flies shows variation in time to death

(A) Individual tracks of infection in live

(B) Individual tracks of infection separated by clusters. Clusters were assigned via hierarchical clustering using Euclidean dissimilarity. Four distinct groups were assigned with cluster 2 and 3 containing the majority of samples (cluster 2 = 29, cluster 3 = 13) and clusters 1 and 4 containing 3 samples each. Data are for 48

(C) Spearman rank correlation (ρ) and the 95% bootstrapped confidence interval (CI) between initial flux and time of death for

(D) Spearman rank correlation and CI between total flux at hour 20 and time of death.

(E) Spearman rank correlation and CI between the log transformed area under the curve (AUC) up until hour 20 and the time of death. The curve here refers to the flux (p/s) versus time curve. In all cases CI of Spearman correlation coefficients were computed by bootstrapping 10,000 synthetic datasets and computing the correlations on these datasets. 2.5 and 97.5 percentile values of the sampled correlations are reported.

We further investigated potential sources of the variability observed in time to death of the

Unlike the immunodeficient line, all of the wild-type flies survived well past two days, with the overall trend of clearing the infection (

Individual infection tracking of wild-type (wt) flies shows two distinct pathways towards bacterial clearance

(A) Individual tracks of infection in live flies (black lines). No flies died during this time course. Threshold of accurate detection demarcated with a gray box.

(B) Individual tracks of infection are grouped by the presence of a secondary peak during the infection process. Although all flies showed a decrease in bacterial load by the 48-h mark, a subset of flies (n = 10) showed an increase in bacterial load between 10 and 25 h (magenta lines). Dashed lines represent the mean trajectory for the genotype. The noise in some of the later time points is due to a shortening of the acquisition time for these animals, which were housed in the same plate as the highly luminescent immunodeficient animals shown in

Here we show that employing an autobioluminescent bacterial reporter enables simple, non-invasive pathogen load determination in

This approach may serve a complementary role to approaches integrating fluorescently labeled bacteria, which have been used to track the localization of some microbes during infection, particularly in larvae (

The flexibility and simplicity of this method should enable its use in a wide range of settings. For example, the

The longitudinal measurements and temporal resolution achieved using bioluminescence enables new observations of infection dynamics. For example, although we found wild-type flies cleared

New insights were also gleaned from experiments with immunodeficient flies. Using a low initial infection dose, we found a moderate correlation between the initial load and time to death for immunodeficient flies, and a stronger correlation between time to death and bacterial load at 20 h post injection for individuals receiving a low initial dose of

In summary, non-invasive tracking of pathogen load in

In this study, we focused on establishing bioluminescence as a tool to noninvasively monitor infections in



Inquiries and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Dr. Zeba Wunderlich (

The plasmids,

The Oregon-R and

An

Before infection,

To determine the concentration of

To determine the concentration of bacteria injected into individual flies, flies were suspended in 250 μL of 1X phosphate buffered saline and homogenized (

All imaging analyses were performed in black 96-well plates (Grenier Bio One) prepared as described above, or on agar plates for plasmid loss studies. Individual experiments took place on separate days, whereas individual infected flies were considered biological replicates. Plates containing flies were imaged immediately post-injection unless otherwise stated. Injected flies and agar plates containing

To estimate the threshold of detection of our assay we first measured the total flux from wells containing only fly media which was found to range between 10

"n" is defined in the relevant figure legends. Statistical tests for all figures were performed in R 3.6.0 except