The establishment of lysogeny by temperate phages is a common occurrence in the environment, with nearly half of all sequenced bacterial genomes carrying prophages (

The complex mechanisms involved in the regulation of prophage genes by the repressor and the physiological outcome of this regulation are illustrated by CI repression of λ prophage genes during lysogeny (

Qin is one of the four lambdoid cryptic prophages of

The promoter of the

In this study, we characterized the transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms of regulation of the

The

Regulation of the

To confirm the roles of DicA and DicC in regulation of

The

The sRNA DicF of the

Production of the sRNA DicF. (A) Northern blots showing DicF levels in

Next, we investigated the mechanism by which the sRNA DicF was processed from the

DicF is generated by processing of a transcript originating at

We established that DicF was generated from the polycistronic transcript initiating at

DicA strongly represses

Using the protein sequence of GfoA, the antirepressor of Gifsy-1 prophage repressor, we performed a position-specific iterative BLAST (PSI-BLAST) search to find similar proteins in

To test whether any of the putative antirepressors impacted induction of the

Rem acts as an antirepressor of

With the identification of Rem as the antirepressor of the

Expression of

Growth of strains expressing

We tested whether deletion of

When an overnight culture of

To further characterize the spontaneous induction phenomenon,

Overnight cultures of

Deletion of

Spontaneous induction of the λ prophage occurs at a frequency of 1 in 10

Interestingly, we did not observe any blue colonies with the

A study with

To identify other conditions that induce expression of the

We hypothesized that induction of

The roles of the cryptic prophage products DicB and DicF in protecting host cells from phage infections (

Working model for regulation of the

The induction of a functional prophage in a lysogen is primarily dependent on repressor inactivation. Representatives of a major class of repressors, like the λ prophage repressor CI, get directly cleaved during the SOS response, which results in expression of the lytic genes that were under its control (

A recent study suggested that one additional mechanism of regulation of the

The bistable switch of λ controls complex genetic circuits involved in the decision between the lysogenic or lytic life cycle. CI and Cro are the two repressors involved in this genetic switch. The role of CI is to block expression of genes involved in the lytic cycle by binding to the operator sequences at P

The cryptic prophages of the model bacterium

All the strains and phages used in this study are summarized in Table S1, and the oligonucleotides (from Integrated DNA Technologies) are listed in Table S2. The strains used in the study are derivatives of

The in-locus

The out-of-locus

The Δ

A Δ

Oligonucleotides containing NdeI and BamHI restriction sites were used to amplify the predicted antirepressor coding sequences from the chromosome of

Using the protein sequence of GfoA, the antirepressor of Gifsy-1 prophage repressor (

Strains were diluted 1:100 from overnight cultures in Tryptone Broth (TB) medium and grown to mid-logarithmic phase at 37°C on a rotary shaker. TB medium was supplemented with 100 μg/mL of ampicillin for pBRCS12 derivative plasmids, and 0.1 mM isopropyl-β-

For experiments in which β-galactosidase activity was assayed at different temperatures, strains were grown overnight at 30°C in TB medium and subcultured 1:100 into TB medium. The strains were grown at three different temperatures, 30°C, 37°C, and 42°C. When cultures reached an OD at 600 nm (OD

Strains harboring the indicated plasmids were subcultured 1:100 in LB medium with 25 μg/mL of chloramphenicol and 100 ng/mL of anhydrous tetracycline and grown in a rotary shaker for 3 h at 37°C. After 3 h, the cultures were transferred to ice. Five-microliter volumes of samples were placed on a 24- by 50-mm no. 1.5 coverslip, and a 1.5% agarose gel pad was placed on the cells for immobilization. Cells were then imaged using a Zeiss apotome microscope under bright-field setting and imaged at a magnification of ×40.

Strains harboring the indicated plasmids were streaked on LB plates with 100 ng/mL of anhydrous tetracycline to induce expression of genes under P

Overnight cultures of the indicated strains in

The Biolog experiment was conducted according to the protocol indicated previously (

LB agar plates with X-Gal (40 μg/mL) or X-Gal and urea at final concentrations of 0.5%, 1%, and 2% were prepared. A single colony for each of the indicated strains was picked and streaked, and the plates were incubated overnight at 37°C. Similarly, the strains were streaked on four LB agar plates with only X-Gal (40 μg/mL) and incubated at 30, 37, 39, and 42°C overnight.

Strains were diluted 1:1,000 in LB medium or adjusted to an OD of 2 in M63 minimal medium supplemented with 0.2% glucose and 1 μM FeSO

Strains were diluted 1:1,000 in LB medium grown in a rotary shaker. RNA samples were extracted using the classic hot-phenol chloroform protocol as described previously (

Cultures were adjusted to an OD of 2 in M63 minimal medium supplemented with 0.2% glucose and 1 μM FeSO