Bacteria derive the energy required for growth through a considerable number of diverse reactions. ATP generated by the metabolic route of glycolysis-citric acid cycle-electron transport chain is a major energy source for aerobic pathogens. However, ROS are inevitable byproducts of aerobic respiration, imposing oxidative stress on pathogens. Aerobic metabolism-generated ROS include superoxide radical (O

Interconnection of PG recycling and glycolysis pathways in

OmpA, a β-barrel porin, is the most abundant outer membrane protein (OMP) in most Gram-negative bacteria. The N-terminus of OmpA forms a β-barrel structure, which is embedded in the outer membrane functioning as a channel for the influx or efflux of molecules. The C-terminal globular domain of OmpA is suspended in the periplasm and non-covalently associated with the PG layer [



The proposed mechanism model responsible for the ∆

Bacterial strains and plasmids used were listed in Supplemental Table

DNA-free RNA was isolated from KJ∆OmpA

In-frame deletion mutants were constructed using the strategy of double cross-over homologous recombination as described previously [

The logarithmic-phase bacterial cells of 2 × 10

The putative promoter region upstream of

The activity of catechol-2,3-dioxygenase (C23O) encoded by

Bacterial cells were inoculated into fresh LB broth at an initial OD

Oxidative stress can be attributed to the decrease of ROS alleviation ability and the increase of ROS production. In our recent study, we reported that downregulation of an OMP OmpO is involved in ∆

Given their genomic organization and simultaneous upregulation in KJ∆OmpA



Transcriptome analysis of





Menadione tolerance of wild-type KJ and its derived mutants. Bacterial cells (2 × 10

The proteins encoded by the

NagI is a member of the LacI family of transcriptional regulators, which generally function as a repressor [

Given the contribution of

In addition, the possibility that there is a separate promoter located upstream of the



The regulation of

To further elucidate the individual contribution of the

Next, we wondered whether

In our previous study, we demonstrated that

To further confirm the link between



The ROS levels of wild-type KJ and its derived constructs. Bacterial cells tested were cultured in LB medium with and without MD of 16 µg/mL for 4 h. DCFH-DA was added to a final concentration 0.01 µM. After 1-h culture, the fluorescence intensity at 520 nm was determined. The relative fluorescence is normalized to the fluorescence of wild-type KJ. *,

Based on our previous findings that

It has been verified that

Given the involvement of

The PG recycling and GlcNAc metabolism are intimately linked in gram-negative bacteria. GlcN-6P is a critical intermediate that can be driven to PG recycling via the GlmM-GlmU pathway or to glycolysis by NagB (Fig.

LacI family transcription regulators generally function as global regulators of sugar metabolism. Furthermore,

NagA and NagB are well-known enzymes participating in GlcNAc metabolism in bacteria [

Based on the MD tolerance assay (Fig.

KJ∆OmpA

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.



Supplementary Material 1