The CRISPR-Cas system,
which was first discovered as an adaptive
immune system in prokaryotes,

CRISPRi can simultaneously regulate the
expression of several specific
genes by introducing multiple sgRNAs and reversibly controlling the
degree of gene expression and repression.

First, the pooled CRISPR screen identifies target genes by sequencing
sgRNAs extracted from cells showing specific phenotypic changes by
introducing a mixture of sgRNA libraries into the cells.

Second, the arrayed
CRISPR screening method introduces an sgRNA
that targets one gene per well in a multiwell plate and observes the
phenotype occurring in each cell.

In most CRISPRi screening studies, large
numbers of oligonucleotides
are individually synthesized using microarrays when preparing sgRNA
libraries. However, building sgRNA libraries using array-synthesized
oligonucleotides is expensive, and the use of constructed libraries
is limited to cells. In this study, we found that the short target
recognition sequence (TRS) lengths of sgRNAs can effectively repress
gene expression. We confirmed that genes related to a specific phenotype
could be identified using the shortened random sgRNA library method
with

We investigated
the length of the TRS in sgRNAs required for CRISPRi in the

Minimum target
recognition sequence (TRS) length of sgRNA. (A)
CRISPRi system with

Based on the above results showing that
markedly shortened sgRNAs
can control gene expression and change cellular phenotypes in CRISPRi,
we explored whether target genes could be screened using random shortened
TRS libraries. Primers with shortened and random TRS were designed,
and sgRNA plasmid libraries with various lengths of TRS (N

Use of sgRNA libraries with random and shortened
TRS for CRISPRi
screening of target genes responsible for Xyl

We then obtained random sgRNA libraries in

Twenty-two different sgRNA plasmids
were obtained from 1, 2, 8,
and 11 white colony-forming transformant cells. Since the target recognition
of dCas9-NG was determined by the TRS and PAM sequences, the TRS and
5′-NG PAM were searched in the xylose operon in the

We visualized the location
of the TRS in the xylose operon. TRS
can be located in regulatory or structural gene regions (

To expand the 5′-shortened and random TRS library method
to screen for new target genes in the genome, we used a violacein
biosynthetic phenotype as a model. We prepared an

Screening of novel target genes for violacein production. (A) Genomic
integration of violacein biosynthetic genes (

The following criteria were used for the selection of target
genes
responsible for enhanced violacein production: (1) target genes that
were repeatedly found in the same library and (2) target genes that
were repeatedly found in different libraries. For the N

We tested whether violacein
production increased with the repression
of the target gene expression. Seventeen cells with a single deletion
of each target gene were grown in culture medium to compare the level
of violacein production with that of wild-type SH148. All single-gene-deleted
strains formed dark purple colonies compared to the wild-type SH148
strain on LB agar supplemented with

Enhanced violacein production
in target-gene knockout strains.
(A) Purple violacein accumulation in target-gene single-knockout strains
on LB agar containing

The regulation of gene expression or deletion
of a gene from the
genome can help to understand the function of a specific gene in a
cell. Among the various tools for functional genomics, widely used
transposon mutagenesis

Generally, the size of a library is as important as
its quality
in screening methods. In the case of CRISPR-Cas9, the lengths of the
TRS of sgRNAs were 20 nt, and the sizes of random TRS with all possible
nucleotide sequences were 4

Recent pooled or
arrayed CRISPRi screening methods have had small
library sizes (10

In order to evaluate the library quality, we selected 10 different
colonies and confirmed different TRSs by Sanger sequencing (

To determine whether the sgRNA library
method can identify genes
related to the phenotype, we screened genes related to the production
of violacein in the recombinant strain. Since violacein has various
physiologically active functions, such as anticancer, antifungal,
and antibacterial activities, much attention has been paid to its
production.

Target genes were selected by analyzing the redundancy of the targets
found in different TRS and subsequently excluding two essential genes
(

Metabolic pathways
of target genes for violacein production selected
by CRISPRi screening. Gray oval: targets reported in the production
of

In summary, we identified
genes associated with phenotypic changes
in ∼10

The bacterial
strains used in this study are listed in

All the constructs used in this
study are listed in

Random sgRNA libraries (N

Violacein is
a water-insoluble
purple pigment found in various Gram-negative bacteria.

The P1

Six random sgRNA libraries (N

The six random sgRNA libraries (N

The expression levels of

For violacein extraction, cells
were harvested by centrifugation (12,000 rpm, 4 °C, 10 min),
and the supernatant was discarded. Methanol (100%; the same volume
as the culture broth) was added to the collected cell pellet, mixed
vigorously by vortex, and incubated at 25 °C for 20 min. After
extracting the methanol, the cell pellets were harvested and discarded
after centrifugation (12,000 rpm, 4 °C, 10 min). The concentration
of violacein in the supernatant was measured by high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) on an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC system using
a C18 column (100 Å, 5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm; Waters Corp.,
WAT05427). Ten microliters of the reaction sample was injected for
the HPLC analysis. The ternary mobile phase was composed of methanol,
acetonitrile, and distilled water (1:1:2, v/v). The pH was adjusted
to 3.6 with acetic acid. Isocratic elution was performed at 30 °C
with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min, and violacein was detected using ultraviolet
light at 575 nm. Violacein standards were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(V9389).