Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), also referred to as mucopolysaccharides, are a class of biomolecules consisting of linear negatively-charged polysaccharides composed of repeating disaccharide units. GAGs are involved in various biological processes, such as cell signaling

GAGs are divided into two types - sulphated and non-sulphated polysaccharides. Sulfated GAGs include heparin, heparan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate and keratan sulfate

(A) Fragment of the HA primary structure. Linear chains of HA range from n = 20 to n = 15,000 repeats

Extraction from animal sources has been considered a traditional method for obtaining hyaluronic acid for years, however it is not associated with large scale production anymore

This paper reviews the characteristics, biological activity and biosynthesis of HA from various origins. The use of fungal and microbial sources for the production of HA is summarized.

As a biopolymer, HA retains the tendency to fold into highly organized structures. The primary structure of HA is presented in

HA tertiary structure is formed of β-sheets based on twofold antiparallel helices

The rupture of the hydrogen bond between acetamido and carboxylate groups causes reversible dissociation of the tertial structure of high-molecular weight HA (HW HA) in the aqueous solution when heated

Conformational transition of HA also depends on the solvent. Software such as NAMD

By virtue of the nucleophilic nature of acidic hydrolysis, the depolymerization of HA occurs at pH above 4 on a glucuronic acid residue because the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital is localized on this residue. HA decomposition at pH below 11 is a result of the destruction of the

Knowledge of the dependence of physico-chemical properties of the HA solution on the pH allows the prediction of HA action in the human organism and the specification of possible HA applications. The effect of conformation on physical properties of hyaluronan has been recently reviewed

The biological role of HA depends on the interaction mechanism between HA and HA-specific receptors such as the membrane glycoprotein CD44

Unlike other GAGs that bind to core proteins with high selectivity and specificity

High-molecular weight HA (HW HA) is a class of polymers with a molecular weight ranging from 1 × 10

Notwithstanding the lack of a strict classification, polymers with a molecular weight greater than 6.1 × 10

Hyaluronic acid has applications in various aspects of the pharmaceutical, medical, and cosmetological industry, implying strict requirements for the purity of the final product

The unique viscosity and high rheological affinity for natural fluids has rendered a high interest in cross-linked HA in a wide range of biomedical applications, such as destruction preventer and restoration initiator of cartilage during osteoarthritis

Osteoarthritis is associated with the excess hyaluronan-binding protein involved in HA depolymerization (HYBID) in cartilage

Dry eye syndrome is characterized by a loss of tear film homeostasis and ocular surface inflammation

The main challenge of cosmetic dermatology is resisting face aging, and one of the possible solutions is a soft tissue augmentation by injection. The use of a filler based on poly-

On account of the rising interest in HA for cosmetic and medical applications, the volume of the global hyaluronic acid market amounted to USD 3.5 billion in 2021 and is expected to grow with a rate of 6.8 % during 2022–2030

In industry, HA is obtained mainly by biological methods such as extraction from animal sources with application of cetylpyridinium chloride precipitation

The most common synthetic approaches include click chemistry reactions

The uniqueness of click reactions stems from a high thermodynamic driving force and high yields of reaction product. This has caused a rising interest in such reactions, in particular in bio-orthogonal methods for obtaining a cross-linked hydrogel

The main problem of obtaining a cross-linked HA is the contamination by residual chemical crosslinking agents. The best methods free of toxic chemical crosslinking agents are self-oxidation by catechol groups

Detailed discussion of the chemical synthesis and modification of the hyaluronic acid is out of the scope of this review, and has been reviewed elsewhere

Chemoenzymatic synthesis combines the high specificity of enzyme-catalyzed reactions and the flexibility of chemical derivatization

Enzymatic methods can be used for obtaining a monodisperse HA through degradation by hyaluronidase

The general approach for HA extraction from animal sources is tissue hydrolysis with subsequent removal of proteins and HA purification

For economic reasons, microbial fermentation has been used for commercial production of HA for decades. The major problems in industrial production of HA include 1) the inhibition of HA synthesis as a result of the accumulation of lactic acid, which is one of the coproducts of enzymatic synthesis

In a recently published review, the economic benefits of the production of HW HA by native and recombinant organisms were analyzed based on costs associated with production, fermentation time, and product yield

Ranges of molecular weights of hyaluronic acid from various sources. 1 -

Enzymes of the Hyaluronic Acid Synthase (HAS) family synthesize HA in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes, and are located in the inner plasma membrane

The direction of chain elongation and the mechanism of HA biosynthesis has been a subject of discussion for decades. Earlier theory suggested that all HASs attach new sugar residues to the non-reducing end of HA

Scheme of the

Metabolic engineering is used to obtain recombinant organisms capable of HA production. That requires the reconstruction of the HA biosynthetic pathway in the chosen organism by expression of genes from natural producers that are responsible for the production of enzymes involved in the HA biosynthesis. The genus

UDP-GlcNAc and UDP-GlcA are indispensable precursors for HA biosynthesis. In pure form, UDP-GlcA is found as a component within the cell wall in native HA-producing bacteria. Usually, these bacteria (e.g.

Insomuch as HA biosynthesis is an energy demanding process, consuming three moles of ATP and two moles of UTP per mole of HA

The genus

The genes hasA, hasB, hasC, hasD and hasE are responsible for the synthesis of HA in

Proteins involved in HA biosynthesis by S. zooepidemicus, and their functions.

Biosynthetic pathways of HA production by

Overview of HA from

ND – no data.

The impact of varying conditions on the yield of the final product was determined as follows (listed in significance-decreasing order): temperature > oxygen level > mixing rate > pH during fermentation

Generally, a mixture of sugars, yeast, various peptones and sera is used as a nutrient source. With an increase in sucrose concentration and a decrease in casein concentration, the density of the mixture and the HA yield increase

The overexpression of genes involved in UDP-Glc

It was experimentally shown on

SpHAS (HAS gene from

The main drawback of the implementation of streptococci is their high pathogenicity. This makes it necessary to explore new organisms that could be used in the industrial production of HA. Insofar as there are no native HA producers among Gram-positive bacteria except streptococci

Overview of HA fermentation conditions, yield and molecular weight of HA obtained from gram-positive bacteria except

The genus

As exemplified on

The main problem of the biosynthesis of HA by recombinant

Thanks to its capacity to adapt to changing conditions

It has been shown that by elimination of the gene encoding the endogenous cellulose synthase and by optimization of fermentation conditions,

Recognized as having GRAS status and possessing a well-developed biosynthetic capability associated with high product yields, the genus

The expression of the heterologous HA synthase gene leads to the accumulation of HA, in particular the co-overexpression of tuaD and gtaB genes increases HA production to 2.48 g/L

Among gram-negative bacteria, only

Overview of HA fermentation conditions, yield and molecular weight of HA obtained from gram-negative bacteria.

ND – no data;

The gene responsible for the biosynthesis of HA in

In

Curdlan (1,3-β-

In biotechnology, fungi have a number of undeniable advantages over bacteria – fast growth, easy genetic manipulation, and absence of endotoxins and viral DNA. They are capable of producing a variety of substances, including HA and its derivatives

Overview of HA from fungi: fermentation conditions, yield and molecular weight.

ND – no data.

The cps-1 gene from

The activity of glycosyltransferases of

In recombinant

Due to the variety of applications, the commercial interest in large-scale and cost-effective production of HA remains strong and is growing steadily.

Recombinant organisms are considered safe and cost-effective alternative sources of HA due to the absence of the need for purification from toxins. Among gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria,

Obtaining HA via microbial and fungal fermentation is still highly efficient on an industrial scale due to the simplicity of implementation and minimal economic costs.

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.