Fungi are a vast kingdom of organisms with a range between 1.5 and 6 million species
[

Both clinical approaches and research applications need taxonomic classification to
assign taxa to their functional traits [

Sequence-based methods allow to classify the fungi kingdom better. Still, the choice
of the methodology used to study the mycobiome, or even the intrinsic
characteristics of a specific fungus, can impact the data generated and the results
reached [

One of the preferred markers for taxonomy assignment is the fungal ribosomal operon,
which is almost 6.000 bp length. It contains three conserved units, the 18S
rRNA gene (small subunit, SSU), 5.8S rRNA gene and 28S rRNA gene (large subunit,
LSU), and two hypervariable units as internal transcribed spacers regions (ITS1 and
ITS2). The ITS units flank the 5.8S RNA gene, and better represent the high
variability among taxonomic levels of fungi; showing a superior species
discrimination and PCR success rates [

Fungal ribosomal operon: two hypervariable internal transcribed spacers
regions (ITS1 and ITS2, marked in orange) and three conserved ones (18S,
5.8S and 28S rRNA, marked in grey) that contain variables domains, nine for
the 18S and twelve for the 28S rRNA genes. Primers set used for the
amplification of the ITS region (3.5 Kb) are shown in orange in the upper
part of the operon, and the ones for amplification of the full operon (6 Kb)
in grey in the lower part [

Primer sets to amplify the fungal operon regions have been described in different
manuscripts, starting from 1990 until 2018 [

Taxonomy with short reads is focused on ITS1 and ITS2 regions, considered as the
official barcoding markers for species-level identification in fungi, due to their
easy amplification, conserved primers sites, widespread use [

Here, we aim to investigate the applicability for taxonomic assignment of the
long-amplicon PCR approach to detect and identify the fungal microbiota present on
complex microenvironments at the species level. We use microbiological fungal
cultures characterized phenotypically as positive controls. We then apply the same
protocol to clinical samples of canine otitis as a complex microenvironment.

LETI laboratories (LETI Animal Health) kindly provided a total of eight
microbiological fungal cultures grown at 28°C in Petri dishes in
Dermatophyte Test Medium (DTM agar) and Sabouraud Chloramphenicol agar. Four of
the cultures had been classified up to the genus level
(

Four canine otitis samples were analysed as complex microbial microenvironments.
Two of them were collected from a Petri dish, divided into two halves parts, to
culture fungi from both ears of a dog, one of the ears was healthy and the other
one showed clinical signs for external otitis (S02_healthy; S03_affected). The
DNA was extracted by using ZymoBIOMICS

Two sets of primers were chosen (

Primers targeting the full ITS region (3.5 Kb) and the whole fungal
operon (6 Kb)

The Nanopore Universal Tag in bold type.

Two PCRs were performed: the first for the amplification of the target and the
second one to add the specific barcode to each sample. DNA initial concentration
was of 5 ng DNA per sample, in 50 μl of PCR final
volume: 15 μl of DNA plus 35 μl of PCR mix,
which contained 10 μl of Phusion

Following the PCR Barcoding kit protocol (SQK-PBK004; Oxford Nanopore
Technologies Ltd, UK), 0.5 nM per each sample was required for the
second PCR to add barcodes of PCR barcoding kit (EXP-PBC001). The final volume
of second PCR is 100 μl, containing 20 μl of DNA
template from the previous PCR at 0.5 nM, 2 μl of
specific barcode and 78 μl of mixture that include
20 μl of 5× Phusion

We proceeded then to the Library preparation with the Ligation Sequencing kit
(SQK-LSK109, Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd, UK). Barcoded samples
(1.5 μg) were pooled in 47 μl of nuclease-free
water and the library was prepared following the manufacturer conditions.

With a final step of Agencourt AMPure XP beads 0.4×, the DNA library was
cleaned and ready to be loaded into the flow cell. We used two SpotON Flow Cells
(FLO-MIN106; Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd, UK) for three MinION runs, primed
with a mixture of sequencing buffer and Flush buffer according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. A quality control of sequencing pores was
done before each run. Libraries were mixed with Sequencing Buffer and Loading
Beads in a final volume of 75 μl. The final mix was added, by
dropping, in the SpotON sample port.

Sequencing runs were performed using the MinKNOWN 2.2 v18.07.2 and the MinKNOWN
v18.12.9 (Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd, UK). Nanopore sequencing from Oxford
Nanopore Technologies includes real-time analysis with the EPI2ME platform
[

For further in-depth analyses, the fast5 files with the sequencing reads were
basecalled and demultiplexed by Albacore v2.3.3 for the 3.5 Kb amplicon or guppy
2.3.5 for the 6 Kb amplicon. Barcodes and adapters were removed by using
Porechop (

The fastq files output of each fungal amplicon with the length of 3.5 Kb and 6 Kb
are loaded on Zenodo (

We aim to develop a long-amplicon PCR approach to detect and identify fungal
microbiota present on complex microenvironments, and to apply it to clinical samples
(canine otitis). As positive controls, we chose microbiological fungal cultures and
fungal strains from a mock community. Some of the cultures were previously
classified by classical microbiology up to the genus level as

All samples were amplified for both amplicon sizes, 3.5 Kb and 6 Kb. In the 3.5
Kb amplicons, we included those domains that better help in the taxonomic
classification of fungi, as shown in

ZymoBIOMICS

Both amplicons correctly detected and identified the ZymoBIOMICS

Both fragments identified

Fungal microbiological cultures showed unexpected results in the
taxonomical classification after sequencing. Few reads from the

For the

Looking at the nomenclature of this fungus,

For the

Conscious that no differences were found in

Relative abundance of

Samples S02 and S03 belong to the same dog, while S04 and S01
belong to two different dogs.

Two of the samples correspond to the same dog, one from a healthy ear (S02)
and the other one (S03) with clinical signs compatible with otitis externa,
and

Our first approach with Oxford Nanopore Technologies sequencing was aimed to
understand if long amplicons are suitable markers to analyse the mycobiome in dog
skin, and which size could be the best in the analysis of mycobiome. The
microbiological cultures were essential for the study as positive controls because
their genome sequences were used to validate the correct detection of fungi in
WIMP.

Primers used to amplify the fungal ribosomal operon domains should be chosen
depending on the fungus, but no standard markers are defined yet. The longest
amplicons should be considered to describe the communities at lower taxonomy
classification [

Few of the reads from the

In this study, the proper positive controls were those from the
ZymoBIOMICS

Finally, we investigate the possibility of reaching species level in complex samples
from the skin of dogs affected by otitis, finding that

The results agree with previous studies on

It is worthy to note that WIMP taxonomic assignation is based on Centrifuge, which
could misclassify some closely-related species due to the absence of complete
reference genomes in the database used. However,

This study is a first approach for the applicability of ribosomal long amplicons to
identify some of the most common fungi in the skin of dogs. We evaluate the
applicability of long reads to the fungal ribosomal operon as a whole, taking into
account not only ITS1 and ITS2 as the most common markers for fungal taxonomy, but
adding the variable regions of 18S and 28S rRNA genes in the 6 Kb amplicon. We used
positive controls from the ZymoBIOMICS

On the contrary, nanopore sequencing is a technology that evolves fast and both the
library preparation and the bioinformatics tools improve every few months for
providing better results in real time. The next steps will lead to simplify the
library preparation with the Rapid Barcoding kit from ONT and the analysis of
complex samples from different origins to detect the causal agent of the disease in
a clinical metagenomics approach.

The fastq files output of each fungal amplicon with the length of 3.5 Kb and 6 Kb are
loaded on Zenodo (http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3662300).

This study was funded by a grant awarded by the Generalitat de Catalunya (Industrial
Doctorate Program, grant 2015DI044) and by Vetgenomics.