Horizontal gene transfer in bacteria provides genetic diversity by spreading DNA from one organism to another (

H-NS forms long nucleoprotein filaments on DNA (0.2–20 kb) (

RNAP is excluded from many, but not all H-NS–StpA-bound genes. (A) H-NS effects on RNAP initiation and elongation. H-NS (dark and light red monomers) and StpA (purple) form linear and bridged filaments on DNA that prevent RNAP–σ

Many enterobacteria contain multiple H-NS paralogs (e.g., StpA) and modulating proteins that bind H-NS filaments (e.g., Hha) (

H-NS binds ~15% of the

Bacteria counter H-NS silencing of transcription initiation using DNA-binding activators that bind near promoters and displace or rearrange H-NS in a mechanism called counter-silencing (

To gain direct insight into H-NS and RfaH function, we used ChIP-seq to map H-NS, StpA, RNAP, σ

To determine which CFT073 genes are bound by H-NS, we used ChIP-seq with polyclonal anti-H-NS antibodies. We chose polyclonal antibodies because epitope tags potentially perturb DNA-binding and bridging (

H-NS and StpA are similarly distributed in UPEC and K-12. (A) Histograms of average H-NS/Input signal for coding genes in CFT073 (bottom, Data set S1). Cumulative number of bound genes at increasing H-NS ChIP signal (top). Red bars and points indicate H-NS bound genes. Data are averages of three biological replicates. The cutoff used for designation as H-NS bound is indicated by the dashed red line. (B) Same as (A), but for

(A) Per gene class analysis of RNAP and H-NS in CFT073 (B) Summary of genome-wide H-NS binding in CFT073 and MG1655 (C) H-NS signal per gene in MG1655 (D) RNAP and H-NS class analysis summary (E) H-NS and StpA signal on genes in CFT073 (F) Summary of H-NS and StpA signal on genes on all strains (G) DNA sequence discrepancies with NCBI record

Next, we asked how the bridging enhancer StpA is distributed within H-NS filaments genome-wide in CFT073 and K-12. For StpA, we generated polyclonal antibodies against purified StpA expressed in a Δ

To ask if the H-NS–StpA–bound CFT073 genes were transcriptionally silenced, we next compared the distributions of H-NS and RNAP on protein-coding genes by ChIP-seq (

Of particular interest, only ~3% of CFT073 genes exhibited both H-NS binding and strong RNAP binding (class IV [

To ask if RfaH regulation depends on H-NS inhibition of RNAP elongation, we mapped RfaH-bound ECs in CFT073 by ChIP-seq using anti-RfaH polyclonal antibodies. RfaH associates with DNA only via its interaction with elongating RNAP at or downstream from an

RfaH targets four H-NS bound loci in WT CFT073. (A) Genome-scale heat map of H-NS ChIP signal in CFT073 (red) compared to RfaH ChIP signal profiles for WT and Δ

(A) Description of TUs with RfaH signal in CFT073 (B) FIMO catalog of

We next asked if the RfaH and RNAP distributions change in the absence of H-NS–StpA filaments. ChIP-seq revealed large-scale changes in RNAP locations in Δ

To ask if all transcribed

To investigate RfaH association with RNAP relative to promoters, we generated σ

The

New RfaH-bound ECs are initiation-silenced by H-NS in WT. (A) Average H-NS (red) and σ

To ask if RfaH aids RNAP elongation through H-NS–StpA filaments, we compared RNAP occupancy in the presence and absence of RfaH (

RfaH aids RNAP progression through H-NS filaments in CFT073. (A) Predicted effect of RfaH on RNAP progression. In WT CFT073, RfaH (magenta) binds RNAP (blue) at

RNAP progression is independent of RfaH in the absence of H-NS and StpA. (A) Predicted lack of effect of RfaH on RNAP progression in Δ

RfaH remains bound to ECs despite intragenic σ

(A) Traveling ratios for WT vs.

We next asked if RfaH action depends on H-NS–StpA inhibition of RNAP elongation by comparing RNAP occupancy across RfaH-regulated TUs in Δ

StpA increases H-NS filament bridging, which slows RNAP topologically (

Deletion of bridging enhancer StpA modestly aids RNAP elongation without RfaH. (A) Predicted effect of RfaH on RNAP progression in Δ

H-NS and StpA exhibit high affinity for RfaH-regulated genes. (A) RTR for all CFT073 strains tested compared (same as

Many horizontally acquired and H-NS-silenced genes contain promoter-like sequences that bind RNAP–σ

Intragenic RNAP–σ

As expected, we observed new intragenic σ

We next asked if RfaH-enhanced RNAP elongation by displacing or transiently remodeling H-NS–StpA filaments by determining H-NS ChIP signal on genes in WT vs Δ

H-NS exhibits high affinity for RfaH-regulated transcription units. (A) Heat maps of H-NS ChIP signal in 1.4 kb tiling windows across the genome of WT (upper) and Δ

Even in strains lacking both H-NS and StpA, RfaH affected RNAP progression (

To test these hypotheses, we examined anti-H-NS and anti-StpA ChIP–signal distributions in strains with deletions in

Many of the Hfp-bound genes were RfaH-regulated (

To test this, we scored CFT073 genes for DNA sequence and shape features associated with high affinity H-NS binding (

We report the genomic distributions of H-NS, StpA, RfaH, σ

RfaH is an elongation counter-silencer of H-NS–StpA gene silencing. (A) The elongation counter-silencing model. RfaH (magenta) acts as an elongation counter-silencer by binding to RNAP at a subset of H-NS–bound loci that contain an

We found that the RfaH regulon consists of eight operons in CFT073 (

All eight RfaH-bound loci were also bound by gene-silencing H-NS–StpA nucleoprotein filaments. CFT073 encodes 4818 coding genes, 18% of which are bound by H-NS–StpA, making the odds of all 25 RfaH-regulated genes being bound by H-NS–StpA remote (<10

The evolutionary origins of RfaH have been speculated (

Our findings directly demonstrate that RfaH is an elongation counter-silencer of H-NS–StpA filaments

We posit that RfaH counter-silences H-NS–StpA filaments through multiple direct and indirect routes (

Bridged, but not linear, H-NS–StpA stimulates transcriptional pausing. Pausing slows RNAP and enables ρ-dependent termination by exacerbating torsional strain generated by transcript elongation (

StpA and Hha both favor bridging relative to H-NS alone (

Bridging by H-NS is favored at low ratios of H-NS to available DNA-binding sites (

Overall, our findings establish that RfaH regulates at least 25 genes in WT pathogenic

UPEC strain CFT073 (

Extended details on methodology used in Hustmyer

ChIP-seq was performed as previously described (

CFT073 reads were aligned to updated RefSeq annotations detailed in GenBank accession number

ChIP-seq data sets were deposited at Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) with accession code