Ribosomes are macromolecular machines
that play a central role
in the synthesis of proteins by catalyzing peptide bond formation
between amino acids in a sequence defined manner. They are composed
of small and large subunits (SSU and LSU) that contain both ribosomal
RNA (rRNA) and ribosomal proteins (r-proteins). In

The seven unique rRNA operons in

Unfortunately, studying if and how native rRNA sequences
affect
protein translation is limited by our inability to isolate and test
ribosomes from specific operons, as well as difficulties in controlling
for the effects of operon promoter architecture and position in the
genome. Previous work has explored inactivating rRNA operons in the
genome to assess how cells performed with fewer ribosomal operons
and found that having fewer instances of rRNA in the genome results
in slower doubling times, but these findings were not controlled for
the differences in genome position and promoter architecture.

Here, we set out to use the iSAT method
to explore whether heterogeneity
of native rRNA sequences affects the activity of resulting ribosomes
and whether this can be used to optimize protein biosynthesis. We
use

The goal of our work was to characterize the sequence
effect of natively occurring rRNA operons on recombinant protein production.
As a model, we focused on the seven distinct genomically encoded rRNA
operons from

Genomic rRNA operons produce ribosomes
that vary in iSAT activity.
(A) rrn operons in the genome have different architectures and sequences.
Residues that differ from the reference operon B sequence are highlighted
in black; white boxes indicate tRNA genes; domains and nucleotide
scale are indicated in gray below. (B) iSAT reaction set up allows
for expression, assembly, and testing of individual rRNA sequences
in a ribosome-free lysate. (C) Single operon rRNA encoding plasmids
show a wide range of activities in iSAT. Gene expression curves of
sfGFP synthesis in iSAT, mean of

We used the iSAT platform

iSAT reactions were incubated at 37
°C where the transcribed
rRNA is assembled into a ribosome and tested for the ability to synthesize
sfGFP. We found the seven naturally occurring rRNA operons in

We next investigated
whether the functional variation of ribosomal
operons is also observed in living

Expression
and assembly of single-operon ribosomes

Operons A, B, C, E, and G were successfully transformed
and selected,
having similar growth phenotypes when grown in LB medium (

We then compared the translational activity of ribosomes derived
from each operon to a wild-type heterogeneous pool of ribosomes. 70S
ribosomes were purified from the single-operon strains A, B, C, E,
and G, as well as from the parent strain MG1655, which natively expresses
all seven rRNA operons. Reactions were prepared

Of note, we see differences between
growth trends (

As expected, we also observed
that the activity trends for purified
homogeneous ribosome pools (

To investigate why

To build operon combinations, we made constructs that used
16S and 23S rRNA genes individually from each operon with counterparts
from operon B to test in iSAT. All constructs carry the 5S rRNA sequence
from the model B operon. As some of the 16S and 23S rRNA sequences
are the same between different operons, this resulted in only 10 unique
sequences, including that of the B operon (e.g., the 23S rRNA sequence
of the B operon matches that of the G operon). When the unique combination
constructs were tested for sfGFP production in iSAT, we found that
6 of 9 pairs yielded ribosomes that produced at least 20% as much
sfGFP as the control from operon B (

Engineered
ribosomal operons highlight that some natively occurring
rRNA sequences are low performing or inactive. (A) iSAT activities
of the combination operons. End point of sfGFP expression, normalized
to iSAT activity of reference BBB, mean of

Considering the structure of the rRNA and where
these polymorphisms
fall in 3D space, we can infer how sequence differences between operons
may affect activity (

The 23S rRNA sequences from both operons C and D carry
polymorphisms
in the PTC that differentiate them from consensus operon B (

To test whether these specific polymorphisms are the source
of
decreased ribosome activity, we synthesized individual plasmids containing
rrnC and rrnD with single motifs of interest mutated to match the
consensus sequence of operon B and tested them in iSAT (

We next sought to use sequence-optimized ribosomes
to increase the protein biosynthesis yields. As a model, we explored
this strategy in the context of cell-free protein synthesis (CFPS).
CFPS is an attractive approach to produce proteins

Homogeneous ribosome pools increase protein biosynthesis yields
relative to heterogeneous ribosome pools. (A) Standard S12 lysates
for CFPS contain a heterogeneous ribosome pool. (B) S12 lysates for
CFPS made from single-operon strains yield lysate expressing a homogeneous
ribosome pool. (C) Homogeneous ribosome pool lysates show a wide range
of sfGFP production, and some outperform standard S12 lysate from
a mixed ribosome pool (MG1655). Operon sequence notation shown as
16S:23S:5S. Error bars indicate standard deviations of

We made cell-free lysates derived from source strains
with homogeneous
ribosome pools (i.e., expressing single rRNA operons) (

We then
took the highest performing lysate (AAA) and used it to
express a panel of five proteins that differ in size, function, and
structure (

We next assayed
two of the proteins for activity. We used an amplified
luminescent proximity homogeneous assay (AlphaLISA)

We set out to investigate the impact of
sequence differences in
rRNA operons found in nature on protein biosynthesis. While past works
have indicated that ribosomal operons in

Our finding that ribosomes derived from the rrnD and rrnH operons
were nonfunctional was surprising and suggests that the native

In summary, this work demonstrates new
basic science knowledge
that functional activity variation exists across ribosomes derived
from the seven rRNA operons in natively expressed ribosome pools in

Ribosomal operon sequences
and annotations
were acquired from the

Plasmids for expression of rRNA

DNA constructs for the
expression of the proteins in CFPS were
made using the pJL1 backbone plasmid as previously described

S150 lysate was prepared as
previously reported.

After thawing on ice for 20 min, S30 buffer was added
at a ratio of 5 mL per 1 g of cell mass, and then the cells were resuspended
by vortexing until fully in solution. 100 μL of HALT Protease
Inhibitor Cocktail was added per 10 mL of cell suspension, and 75
μL of Takara Recombinant RNase inhibitor was added per 4 g of
dry cell mass. Cell lysis was achieved using a C3 Avestin Homogenizer
at a pressure of approximately 25,000 psig. Following lysis, a second
aliquot of the Takara Recombinant RNase inhibitor was added. The resulting
mixture was centrifuged at 12,000

The
samples were then spun in an ultracentrifuge at 90,000

Electrocompetent

50 ng of purified mutant pAM552 plasmid transformed into the SQ171fg
electrocompetent cells. The cell/plasmid mixture was then incubated
in 850 μL of SOC in a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube at 37 °C
while being shaken at 250 rpm for 1 h. After the incubation, 270 μL
of the cell recovery was transferred to 2 mL of Super Optimal broth
with Catabolite repression (SOC) supplemented with 50 μg/Ll
Cb (Cb

Constructs that did not yield colonies on LB-Suc

To confirm that the cells relied solely on the mutated ribosomes,
overnight cultures of the successfully transformed SQ171fg strains
were grown in 5 mL volumes, and total RNA was extracted using the
QiagenTM RNeasy Mini kit. RT-PCRs were conducted using the Invitrogen
SuperScript IV One-Step RT-PCR system to amplify regions of rRNA that
contained mutations in the operons. The amplified products were then
Sanger sequenced.

Overnight cultures
of SQ171fg solely
expressing the desired rRNA operon were diluted and normalized to
OD600 of 0.01, in antibiotic-free LB medium. Seven replicates of 180
μL each were plated on Corning 96-well flat bottom plates, with
MG1655 (SQ171fg parent strain) and BL21 Star (DE3) (common protein
production strain) serving as positive controls and noninoculated
LB as blank. Plates were incubated in an Agilent BioTek Synergy Neo2Microplate
Reader at 37 °C for 25 h while measuring cell density (OD600)
every 20 min. Readings from the blank wells were averaged and subtracted
from all of the data points before analysis. Wells containing OD600
values that fell more than two standard deviations away from the median
were categorized as outliers and excluded from the analysis. Lag time
for each well was output as a calculation from the Neo2 software.

500 mL of LB-Miller
was induced with an overnight culture of strain containing desired
ribosomes, targeting an OD of 0.05. Cells were grown at 37 °C
at 250 rpm until they reached an OD of 0.6–0.8. The cells were
then pelleted via centrifugation for 10 min at 8,000

The cell pellet was resuspended in 1
mL of Buffer A per gram of cell pellet and lysed by sonication (50%
Amplitude, 45 s ON, 59 s OFF, 950 J per mL of suspension). The sonicated
cell suspension was then diluted to a total volume of 13 mL in Buffer
A and centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000

Cell growth
for extract preparation
was carried out as previously described.

The pellet was thawed on ice and resuspended
with 1 mL of S30 Buffer per gram of pellet in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube.
The cells were then lysed via sonication (50% amplitude, 45 s ON,
59 s OFF, 950 J per mL of suspension) and centrifuged for 10 min at
12,000

CFPS reactions for the
expression of pJL1-AdhE2 were set up with S12 lysates AAA and MG1655
as described in the

The overnight reactions were
then mixed with 10 mM butyraldehyde, 10 mM Mg(Glu)

SQ171fg strains containing the
single operon ribosomes were grown overnight in 3 mL cultures, with
Cb

Total CFPS
yields were quantified by incorporation of

The AlphaLISA assay leverages the use
of proprietary donor and acceptor beads that enable detection of protein–protein
interactions based on bead proximity.

iSAT reactions were assembled with four
5-μL replicates per rRNA construct being tested based on previous
work.

The Echo 525 Acoustic Liquid Handler was used to
assemble reaction components (separated into a master mix and individual
rRNA plasmids to be tested) into 384-well nunc_267461 plates from
a 384-well Polypropylene 2.0 Plus source microplate (Labcyte, PPL-0200).
The nunc_267461 plate was then spun down, and reactions were run in
a plate reader at 37 °C, measuring sfGFP fluorescence (excitation:
485 nm, emission: 528 nm) every 15 min and with constant shaking for
15 h.

CFPS reactions were set up as previously
published