Copper (Cu) is a key metal cofactor for aerobic unicellular and multicellgular organisms, where it contributes to the activity of specific redox enzymes, including the superoxide dismutase and the cytochrome

In gram-negative bacteria, the outer-membrane TonB-dependent receptors (TBDRs) play a key role in extracellular Fe³

We have previously shown that the environment modulates Cu response in

In the present study, we aimed to characterize a TBDR involved in Fe import, which is associated with a 2-oxoglutarate/Fe

The genetic screening of a

Copper resistance is relying on a TonB-dependent receptor. (

Considering the role of TBDRs in metal transport, we wondered whether the Cu sensitivity of the Δ

To assess the potential role of CciT in the resistance to other metal stresses, we grew the Δ

TBDRs are mostly known for their role in the uptake of Fe

CciT is involved in Fe uptake. (

The genome of

To explore the link between optimal Fe uptake and Cu resistance in

Intracellular Fe content supports Cu resistance in

The CciT-encoding gene is part of an operon with the CCNA_R0097 sRNA gene and the CCNA_00027 gene predicted to encode a 2-oxoglutarate/Fe

CciT and CciO operon organization is conserved. (

To determine the potential involvement of CciO and R97 in Cu resistance, we generated in-frame deletions of the

To reinforce this hypothesis, the growth profiles of the Δ

We further investigated the role of the CciO protein in Cu and Fe homeostasis by measuring the intracellular Cu and Fe levels in the Δ

CciO is not involved in Fe uptake. (

To better understand the role of CciT and CciO in

The significance of maintaining proper Fe homeostasis in Cu resistance is an emerging concept in bacteria. Our study emphasizes the role of a TBDR, CciT, along with its partner CciO, a 2OGX, in conferring Cu resistance in the free-living alphaproteobacterium

In this study, we demonstrated that CciT, an Fe-importing TBDR, is essential for effective Cu resistance. While TBDRs are typically known for their role in actively importing extracellular substrates, there are exceptions, such as PopC from

Previous studies proposed that CciT, along with the CCNA_00138, HutA, and CCNA_03023 TBDRs, are involved in Fe homeostasis owing to their upregulation under Fe-limiting conditions (

We also demonstrated that the environmental Fe concentration influences the intracellular Fe content of

Interestingly,

The role of CciO in Cu resistance remains to be elucidated, as the protein does not seem to play a role in Fe or Cu transport. In

Hypothetical models for Cu resistance provided by the CciT–CciO system in

Our study revealed a strong functional link between the activity of the TBDR CciT and the 2OGX CciO, both of which play a key role in maintaining Fe homeostasis in

Bacterial cultures in exponential growth phase (OD

Overnight cultures in stationary phase were diluted in 1:10 serial dilutions up to 10

Exponentially grown

Cells from 15 mL cultures of

Peptides were separated by nanoUHPLC (nanoElute, Bruker) on a 75 µm ID, 25 cm C18 column with integrated CaptiveSpray insert (Aurora, IonOpticks, Melbourne) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min at 50°C. LC mobile phase A was water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v), and B was ACN with formic acid 0.1% (v/v). Samples were loaded directly on the analytical column at a constant pressure of 800 bar. The digest (1 µL) was injected, and the organic content of the mobile phase was increased linearly from 2% B to 15% in 22 min, 15% B to 35% in 38 min, and 35% B to 85% in 3 min. Data acquisition on the tims TOF Pro was performed using Hystar 5.1 and timsControl 2.0. tims TOF Pro data were acquired using 100 ms TIMS accumulation time and mobility (1/K0) range from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs/cm². Mass-spectrometric analysis was carried out using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method (

All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.8.1). Mascot was set up to search the

Scaffold (version Scaffold_5.1.1, Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 97.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Percolator posterior error probability calculation (

Bacteria were grown in M2G up to OD

RNA (2 µg) isolated from