Natural products are compounds with great value in the biological, pharmaceutical, and industrial fields. However, many difficulties are encountered when culturing the original strains of natural products. Synthetic biology, which involves cloning synthetic gene clusters into chassis cells, is an important method for synthesizing natural products. Synthetic gene clusters are often cloned into host cells such as

Organizing multiple related genes into operons, as prokaryotes naturally do,

Ribonucleases (RNases) are key players in SRPS,



Using

To investigate the action of SRPS‐related enzymes on transcripts in

The number of RppH, RNase E, and exoRNase (PNPase, RNase II, and RNase R) processing positions identified. Schematic representation of the numbers of trimming stop (red) and start (green) positions for each exoRNase. The numbers of positions processed by RNase E and RppH are shown in the gray/black and blue columns, respectively.

There were conserved –10 elements (TATAAT) upstream of the RppH targetome (Figure

Distinct features were observed between the 5′ and 3′

Analysis of the sequences and structure conservations of the identified targetomes. a,b) Sequence and structure conservation of the 5′ (a) and 3′ (b)

Moreover, the 3′

Structural analysis of the three exoRNase targetomes showed that there was a decrease in the average MFEs around the 3′

A total of 598 and 953 trimming start and stop positions of RNase II, respectively, were identified (Table

Furthermore, 1285 3′ trimming start positions of PNPase were identified, which were more than twice the number of stop positions (

Mechanisms underlying the interplay between endoRNases and exoRNases in transcript decay. a) Mechanism and b) schematic of the fragment generated by endoRNase and further fully degraded by PNPase in the WT. Briefly, endoRNase sheared the transcript and generated a short fragment, following which the PNPase digested the fragment from its 3′ end until it was fully degraded, with the 5′ end of the fragment identified as the 5′

In contrast, RNase R showed limited activity in

To investigate how RNase E cooperates with the 3′‐to‐5′ exoRNases to regulate TA, we compared the targetomes of RNase E and three exoRNases. The mechanisms were as follows: a) The transcript was first sheared by RNase E, following which the 3′‐to‐5′ exoRNases digested the transcript from the exposed 3′ end and stopped at the 3′

According to the updated definitions of operons and transcription units,

Distribution of SPRS‐enzyme targetomes on operons.

The percentages in the table have been calculated as the current column divided by the previous column on the same line.

While RppH requires at least two unpaired nucleotides, it prefers three or more nucleotides, as determined by several

The actions of RppH and PNPase on the quantitative modulation of the TA. a) The table in the top‐left corner presents the scores assigned to the first three RNA nucleotides of the TSS. The scatter diagram shows the correlation between the average processing ratio and sum of the scores assigned to the three nucleotides. b) The scatter diagram shows the correlation between the end ratios at the trimming stop positions of PNPase and the MFE (Δ

The Δ

More than one‐third (66/175) of the 5′

Three examples (

5′‐UTR processing exposed the RBS on the transcript and enhanced the translation efficiency. Stem‐loops formed by the 5′‐UTR‐2 sequences of a)

Based on the above conclusions, we propose the following quantitative regulatory model for SRPS in

To assess the feasibility of using SRPS elements in synthetic biology, we constructed a dual‐reporter system (

The feasibility of using SRPS elements in synthetic biology applications was confirmed in vitro. a) Schematic representation of the dual‐fluorescence reporter system consisting of a

To further explore and utilize SRPS elements, we constructed the first database of prokaryotic SRPS sites (ProSRPSite,

Balanced expression of multiple genes in chassis cells is a central challenge in synthetic biology. Although a polycistronic operon offers the advantages of 1) regulating several genes simultaneously,

In this study, we profiled the genome‐wide targets of SRPS‐related RppH, RNase E, PNPase, RNase II, and RNase R enzymes in

Although several examples of differential stability within operons have been characterized on a case‐by‐case basis

Here, we constructed an operon consisting of a promoter and two different fluorescent genes, to assess the function of the identified SRPS elements in optimizing gene expression in an operon. First, we found that the first two nucleotides of the TSS were essential for modulating the expression ratio of the first gene (

The SRPS mechanism has the following characteristics: Compared to other regulatory mechanisms, such as engineered promoters,

Second, the SRPS can be regulated quantitatively. The processing efficiency of RppH is determined by the first three RNA nucleotides at the 5′‐terminus of the primary transcript, and in turn determines the cleavage efficiency of endoRNases by the cascade. After the transcript is cleaved by the endonuclease, there is a significant negative correlation between the free energy of folding (Δ

Third, SRPS is ubiquitous in bacteria. Ribonuclease phylogenetic analysis indicated that almost all bacteria contained endoRNases, exoRNases, and oligoribonucleases.

In conclusion, we present the first single‐nucleotide resolution genome‐wide targetomes of SRPS‐related enzymes in

The strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table

Mutants of Δ

The list of select SEnd‐ and RNA‐seq results is shown in Table

Finally, the average FPKM for each gene calculated from all replications was used for further analysis.

Three processed libraries were extracted from the total library, based on the presence of the special 5′‐adapter sequence. Briefly, the processed RNA (5′‐P

To identify the RNase E processing positions, the previously reported methods were used.

The libraries of Δ

Nucleotide motifs surrounding the processing positions of SRPS enzymes were generated using WebLogo (v3.6.0). RNAfold (v2.4.14) was used to calculate the MFE (Δ

The processing positions of RNase E were compared with those of the exoRNases. First, the 3′

The processing ratio of the RppH processing sites was calculated using the following formula:

The sum of the processed 5′ ends around the processed positions was represented as the sum of the 5′ end‐counts, which were retrieved from the alignment results of the processed paired end reads from 4 nt upstream to 4 nt downstream of the processed positions. The sum of the 5′ ends around the processed sites was calculated in the same manner; the only difference was that the 5′ end‐counts were retrieved from the alignment results of the total paired end reads. The average processing ratios of all the replicates for each position were calculated. Finally, the average processing ratio of the processed positions was calculated with the same first three nucleotides, and the correlations between these processing ratios and the sum of the scores of the first three sequences. Plots were generated using OriginPro 2020 software (OriginLab, Massachusetts, USA).

42 3′ pnp stop sites that paired with 3′ pnp start were selected, to calculate the end ratios of these positions using the following formula:

The total 3′ ends of the transcripts were counted as the sum of the 3′ ends 5 nt upstream of the 3′

The FPKM of each gene was calculated as described above. If the FPKM values of two adjacent genes within the same operon were both ≥2 and their ratio was ≥3 or ≥1/3, or if one of them was <2 and the absolute value of their difference was ≥10, the operon was determined to be a complex‐operon exhibiting a highly skewed TA landscape.

Cultures of MG1655 and its mutants at log‐phase, with OD

Cells at log‐phase were harvested by means of centrifugation at 10000×

The operons satisfying the following criteria were retrieved: First, the operon that covered at least one 5′

Total RNA (2 µg) was used to synthesize first‐strand cDNA with the cDNA synthesis primer SP1, using Transcriptor Reverse Transcriptase (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). The product was purified using the High Pure PCR Product Purification Kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). A homopolymeric A‐tail was added to the 3′ end of the first‐strand cDNA using recombinant terminal transferase and dATP. Nested PCR was performed using the cDNA as a template, to obtain gene‐specific products. The PCR products were cloned into the pMD19‐T vector (TaKaRa, Beijing, China) for further sequencing.

To assess the effect of the 5′‐UTR on the translation efficiency of downstream genes, an mCherry reporter system was constructed (Figure

A dual‐fluorescence reporter system was constructed to evaluate the effects of the stem‐loop and RNase E cleavage sites. The

Analysis of the Correlation Between the Processing Ratio and First Three Nucleotide Sequences of the Transcript In Vitro

The first and second A bases after the TSS of the lacI promoter in the plasmid pBR2‐gfp‐loop1/2(+/−)‐mCherry were mutated to C, G, or T using the QuikChange site‐directed mutagenesis method,

The measurements were performed in triplicate and independently repeated at least three times, except otherwise described. Data were given as mean ± standard deviation (s.d.). Statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism 8.0 software (GraphPad, San Diego, USA). Two‐tailed Student's t‐test was applied to detect differences between the two groups with a single independent factor. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

The SEnd‐ and standard RNA‐seq datasets from this study can be found in the National Center for Biotechnology Information Gene Expression Omnibus, under Accession Number GSE117737.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

D.L., H.L., and Y.W. contributed equally to this work. R.H. designed research; D.L. and J.C. performed experiments; H.L. and R.H. analyzed data; D.L. constructed the database; R.H., H.L., and D.L. wrote the paper.

Supporting Information

Click here for additional data file.

Supporting Table 1–2

Click here for additional data file.

Supporting Table 3

Click here for additional data file.

Supporting Table 4

Click here for additional data file.

Supporting Table 5

Click here for additional data file.

Supporting Table 6

Click here for additional data file.

Supporting Table 7‐8

Click here for additional data file.