Plasmid-based reverse genetics (RG) systems
enable viral genomes
to be rapidly modified in a directed manner, providing molecular details
about viruses that were previously very difficult to ascertain. These
systems were first developed in the 1980’s–90’s
for positive and negative stranded RNA viruses

Influenza A virus (IAV) RG systems have been instrumental for addressing
key questions about the viral life cycle, virus evolution, and for
developing new influenza vaccine strategies.

Multiple studies have reported
difficulties cloning several IAV
gene segments (e.g., PB2, PB1, and HA) into established RG plasmids,

Several approaches have been reported to increase
the stability
of IAV RG plasmids in

Our laboratory has
frequently encountered difficulties in cloning
specific neuraminidase (NA) and hemagglutinin (HA) gene segments from
IAVs into a common RG plasmid (pHW). Based on this observation, we
examined if the IAV gene segment or features in the RG plasmid are
responsible for the instability in

To assess temporal
and species related changes in the properties
of NA from IAVs, we generated a RG plasmid library carrying NA genes
from human and avian H1N1 virus isolates spanning several decades.
The library was created by an

Human and avian H1N1
NA plasmid library construction for influenza
RG. (A) Schematic of the iVEC cloning strategy for creating the human
and avian NA subtype 1 (N1) plasmid libraries. Each N1 gene segment
and the pHW plasmid were amplified by PCR prior to

We examined the cloning problem more thoroughly
by comparing the
potentially unstable avian N1 gene from 1999 (N1

Previous studies have shown that
the CMV promoter in eukaryotic expression plasmids contains

Analysis of
gene expression from the pHW plasmid in

Based on the sfGFP results, we attempted to silence gene expression
from the pHW plasmid in

Analysis of gene expression from the pHW plasmid variants in prokaryotic
and eukaryotic cells. (A) Diagrams showing how plasmid-derived gene
transcription can be minimized by positioning (i) three cooperative
wild type

To determine if the presence of
the

To test if the regulatory elements improved
the ability to clone the problematic avian N1

pHW plasmid variants differ in the ability to
accommodate the N1

NA gene segments and the indicated
pHW variant were amplified by PCR, mixed, and transformed into

Similar to a previous study,

HA (H1 and H6) gene segments are more readily
introduced into the
pHW/O

HA gene segments and the indicated
pHW variant were amplified by PCR, mixed, and transformed into

To investigate
if all three

Location
and number of

All of our data thus far suggests that expression from the influenza
genes in the pHW plasmid is responsible for the observed instability
and cloning difficulties. To test this more directly, we equally divided
the pHW/O

Addition
of two or more

Influenza virus rescue using pHW/O

All rescued viruses were passaged in embryonated eggs to determine
if any differences were observed in viral propagation or protein content.
Each virus rescued from the pHW/O

Median tissue culture infectious
doses per milliliter (TCID

To examine if the delay in the viral rescue kinetics
would be exacerbated
in other settings, we compared the rescue of WSN from eight pHW/O

During this study,
small scale preparations of pHW-H6 and pHW/O

H6 gene segment stability in pHW and pHW/O

All influenza RG systems are dependent on

Numerous viral and non-viral genomic
sequences have been reported
to be unstable or “toxic” in

The native

The benefit of the

Cooperative repression in the native

Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM),
fetal bovine serum (FBS),

The eight WSN (A/WSN/33) and
PR8 (A/PR/8/34) RG plasmids were provided by Dr. Robert Webster (St.
Jude Children’s Research Hospital). The RG plasmids were sequenced,
and the GenBank Identifications along with the details for generating
the NA (N1-BR18; GISAID ID: EPI1212833) RG plasmid were described
previously.

Ligation reactions
consisting of 1 μL of the PCR insert and vector mixtures were
transformed into 50 μL of XL10-Gold cells per the manufacturer’s
instructions (Agilent) and cultured overnight at 37 °C on LB-agar
ampicillin plates. Plates were imaged with an Azure C600 and 5–10
individual or pooled colonies were randomly selected for growth on
a master plate and for direct colony screening by PCR. For screening,
colonies were resuspended in 1× PCR reaction buffer (RB) (10×
RB: 200 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 100 mM KCl, 60 mM (NH

Plasmids
containing the gene encoding sfGFP were transformed into XL10 Gold
cells and amplified overnight in 10 mL LB broth cultures containing
100 μg/mL ampicillin. The following day, 1 mL of the overnight
culture was sedimented (10,000

HEK 293T/17
cells (CRL-11268)
were cultured at 37 °C with 5% CO

Madin–Darby canine kidney 2 (MDCK.2;
CRL-2936) cells and HEK 293T/17 cells were cultured at 37 °C
with 5% CO

Initial passages
(E1) were carried out by inoculating 9–11 day old embryonic
SPF chicken eggs with 100 μL of the rescued virus either undiluted
(PR8) or diluted 1/10 in PBS (WSN). Eggs were incubated for 3 days
at 33 °C and placed at 4 °C for 2 h prior to harvesting.
Allantoic fluid was harvested individually from each egg and clarified
by sedimentation (2000g; 5 min). NA activity and HAU measurements
were taken prior to combining each viral harvest for storage at −80
°C or viral purification.

Viruses in allantoic fluid were isolated
by sedimentation (100,000

NA activity
measurements were performed in 96-well low protein binding black clear
bottom plates. Reactions were initiated by bringing up each sample
(50 μL viral cell-culture medium or 10 μL allantoic fluid)
to a volume of 200 μL with 37 °C RB (0.1 M KH

HAU titers were determined by a two-fold
serial dilution in 96-well plates using a sample volume of 50 μL
and PBS. Following the dilution, 50 μL of 0.5% TRBCs were added
to each well and the plate was incubated 30 min at room temperature.
HAU titers were determined as the last well where agglutination was
observed. Median tissue culture infectious doses (TCID

Purified virions equal
to ∼5 μg of total viral protein were mixed with 2×
sample buffer. Samples were heated at 50 °C for 10 min and resolved
on a 4–12% polyacrylamide Tris-glycine SDS-PAGE wedge gel.
Gels were stained with simple blue and imaged with an Azure C600.