Although antibiotics are powerful antibacterial weapons, their widespread and frequently uncontrolled use has led to the emergence of numerous multi-resistant bacteria. Aminoglycosides (AGs) are highly efficient antibiotics against Gram-negative pathogens, yet they cause toxic side effects

The protein sequence of ViaA reveals that it has an N-terminal part (N-Terminal domain of ViaA, NTV) with a predominantly α-helical character that does not show sequence similarity to any other known protein (Fig.

While a previous observation that ViaA or NTV slightly enhance the ATPase activity of RavA suggested a physical interaction between the two proteins via the N-terminal part of ViaA

Complementary BLI studies using His-NTV-AviTag demonstrated similar RavA binding kinetics as the full-length ViaA despite the monomericity of the NTV construct (Supplementary Fig.

Previous observation that upon cell fractionation RavA was mostly present in the cytoplasmic fraction whereas the majority of ViaA partitioned into the inner membrane fraction

Surprised by the absence of in vitro interactions between ViaA and its purified proposed binding partners, we wondered what might then be the reason for its described partitioning into the inner membrane fraction

Unexpectedly, although RavA is presumed to be cytoplasmic, RavA-OE showed a propensity to localise at the cell periphery rather than being distributed homogeneously through the volume (Fig.

In parallel to imaging the RavA-OE and ViaA-OE bacteria by epifluorescence and super-resolution microscopy, bacteria overexpressing His-RavA, His-ViaA and AviTag-ViaA-His were subjected to high pressure freezing and freeze substitution followed by ultrathin cell sectioning, and their ultrastructure examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). A dark layer of matter, supposedly corresponding to the RavA protein, accumulated under the bacterial inner membrane, in line with the fluorescence microscopy observations (Fig.

The inner membranes of

The observation that ViaA can simultaneously interact with RavA and with lipids is consistent with ViaA being a two-domain protein, with the NTV binding to RavA and the CTV binding to lipids. Since the 3D structure of ViaA is unknown, we examined its primary sequence and the 3D structure prediction of the CTV provided by Alphafold

Finally, to further validate the proposed lipid binding sites of RavA and ViaA, we examined the morphology of RavA

We then investigated the effect of RavA or ViaA overexpression on the membrane lipid composition (Fig.

Having recently shown that

Survival of wild-type MG1655, ViaA

An attractive hypothesis could be that ViaA, eventually with the help of RavA, would sensitise

Finally, we took additional advantage of our time-dependent killing assay to demonstrate that the PAmCherry tag does not affect the properties of ViaA. Indeed, a complementation assay with overexpressed PAmCherry-ViaA and ViaA-PAmCherry (Supplementary Fig.

Since AGs are notoriously inefficient under the anaerobic and acidic conditions of the human gastrointestinal tract, insights into the mechanism of the

We now provide extensive in vitro and in vivo biochemical, biophysical, optical imaging and morphological evidence that RavA and ViaA do not only interact in a nucleotide-dependent fashion and bind specific phospholipids in vitro, but also localise at the bacterial inner membrane and modulate membrane lipid composition upon overexpression in vivo. In particular, we demonstrate specific RavA-PG and ViaA-PA/CL interaction, and reveal a prominent effect of ViaA overexpression on the CL-enrichment of the

Importantly, we show that the RavA and ViaA lipid-binding propensity is directly linked to their effect on the AG bactericidal activity under anaerobiosis, because mutations abolishing interaction with lipids preclude Gm toxicity under conditions of fumarate respiration. Our finding that RavA and ViaA do not permeabilise the lipid bilayer, and the independent observations by us and by others that anaerobic RavA-ViaA-mediated AG sensitivity is dependent on the proton motive force (pmf)

Constructs used for experiments presented in each of the main and

Mutant strains of K-12 substrain MG1655 (ATCC 47076) were generated by recombineering following the protocols of earlier publications

To engineer the here described mutant strains MG1655-

N- and C-terminally AviTagged ViaA constructs were transformed in chemically competent BL21 (DE3)

For purification of expressed AviTag-ViaA-His and His-ViaA-AviTag constructs, pellets (4 for a 2 l culture) were resuspended in 30 mL 25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 1 μL benzonase, 1 x Complete tablet, and disrupted by three passages through a Homogeniser at 18,5000 psi. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation for 1 h at 48,384 g, and the supernatant was filtered using a 0.2 μL filter and flown over a 5 mL NiNTA IMAC column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with buffer A (25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 25 mM Imidazole). AVI-ViaA-HIS was washed with 5 CV of buffer A, and eluted using a gradient of 0–100% buffer B (25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 300 mM Imidazole). The top fractions after IMAC were pooled and desalted using a 5 mL HiTrap Desalting column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with 25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol. After desalting, the buffer exchanged protein was concentrated and injected on a SD200 10/300 increase column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with 25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 1 mM DTT. Purified ViaA fractions, eluted at around 14 mL, were flash-frozen and stored at −80 °C for later use. AviTag-ViaA

Expression of soluble NuoEF and NuoEFG was based on Braun et al.

Expression of soluble FrdA was based on the protocol by Léger et al.

Prior to conducting MALLS experiments, flash-frozen purified AviTag-ViaA-His and His-NTV-Avi samples were thawed and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 30 min. SEC-MALLS experiments were conducted at 4 °C on a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Schimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) consisting of a DGU

Purified AviTag-ViaA-His (80 µL at 3 mg/mL) or His-NTV-AviTag (80 µL at 2 mg/mL) were injected on a Superdex 200 increase 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare), equilibrated at 4 °C with a buffer containing 25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl

SAXS data were collected on the BM-29 BIOSAXS beamline at the ESRF (Grenoble, France)

The forward scattering (

For BLI binding studies, biotinylated AviTag-ViaA-His, His-ViaA-AviTag and His-NTV-AviTag samples were expressed and purified as described earlier, but with the addition of 50 μM D-biotin to the LB medium during expression overnight at 18 °C. Binding studies were performed with C-terminally His-tagged RavA and RavAΔLARA proteins purified as described

The anti-RavA-Nb and anti-ViaA-Nb were obtained from the nanobody generation platform of the AFMB laboratory (Marseille, France) as described

MG1655 cells were transformed with a low-copy auxiliary pT7pol26 (Kan

For immunofluorescence staining cells were harvested, fixed and permeabilised as described

For each sample, 2 μL of cells in suspension were mounted between a glass slide and a 1.5 h glass coverslip, and observed using an inverted IX81 microscope, with the UPLFLN 100× oil immersion objective from Olympus (numerical aperture 1.3), using a fibered Xcite™ Metal-Halide excitation lamp in conjunction with the appropriate excitation filters, dichroic mirrors, and emission filters specific for DAPI/Hoechst, AF488, mCherry or AF647 (4X4MB set, Semrock). Acquisitions were performed with Volocity software (Quorum Technologies) using a sCMOS 2048 × 2048 camera (Hamamatsu ORCA Flash 4, 16 bits/pixel) achieving a final magnification of 64 nm per pixel.

Super-resolution single molecule localization microscopy was performed using STORM (after nanobody labeling) and PALM (PAmCherry fusion proteins) approaches. For STORM imaging, cells labeled as mentioned above, were transferred to a glucose buffer containing 50 mM NaCl, 150 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 10% glucose, 100 mM MEA (mercaptoethylamine) and 1x Glox solution from a 10x stock containing 1 μM catalase and 2.3 μM glucoseoxidase. For PALM, cells expressing the ViaA fused constructs with PAmCherry, were resuspended in PBS. In each case, 2 µL of the cells in suspension were mounted as specified

Cell cultures were centrifuged at 4000 g for 5 min. A pellet volume of 1.4 μL was dispensed on the 200 μm side of a type A 3 mm gold platelet (Leica Microsystems), covered with the flat side of a type B 3 mm aluminum platelet (Leica Microsystems), and was vitrified by high-pressure freezing using an HPM100 system (Leica Microsystems). Next, the samples were freeze substituted at −90 °C for 80 h in acetone supplemented with 1% OsO

Lipids were extracted from freeze-dried cells. First, cells were harvested by centrifugation and then immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Once freeze-dried, the pellet was suspended in 4 mL of boiling ethanol for 5 min to prevent lipid degradation and lipids were extracted according to Folch et al.

Total phospholipids were quantified from their fatty acids. The lipid extract was solubilised in pure chloroform and 5 µg of C21:0 (internal standard) were added in an aliquot fraction. Fatty acids were converted to methyl esters (FAME) by a 1-hour incubation in 3 mL 2.5% H2SO4 in pure methanol at 100 °C

All phospholipids were purchased from Avanti Lipids (Sigma). 2 µL of chloroform solutions (5, 0.5 and 0.05 mg/mL) of 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-glycero-3-phosphocholine (16:0-18:1 PC), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-L-serine (16:0-18:1 PS), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (PE 16:0-18:1 PE), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1’-rac-glycerol) (16:0-18:1 PG), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphate (16:0-18:1 PA) and 1’,3’-bis[1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho]-glycerol (16:0-18:1 Cardiolipin) were spotted using a Hamilton syringe onto a nitrocellulose membrane (Biorad trans-blot turbo RTA Midi 0.2 µm) to yield 10, 1 and 0.1 µg of the lipid per spot. The membranes were blocked using a Tris-buffered saline (TBS) solution (pH 7.4) supplemented with 10% (w/v) non-fat milk powder at room temperature for 1 h before incubated with 10 µg/mL of the purified proteins (His-RavA, AviTag-ViaA-His, LdcI-His) or protein complex (LdcI-RavA) in TBS containing 0.05 % (v/v) Tween-20 (TBST). LdcI was purified as previously described

For RavA bound via ViaA, the milk-blocked membrane was incubated with TBST alone (RavA only) or with 10 µg/mL AviTag-ViaA-His overnight at 4 °C, washed three times with TBST buffer and incubated with 10 µg/mL His-RavA for 2 h at room temperature. The chemiluminescent signal was developed after the incubation of the membranes with anti-RavA serum followed by incubation with the HRP-conjugated secondary antibody. Likewise, for ViaA bound via RavA, the membrane was incubated with 10 µg/mL His-RavA overnight before incubation with 10 µg/mL AviTag-ViaA-His. The LdcI-RavA complex was prepared by mixing the purified LdcI and His-RavA proteins in molar ratio of 1:2.25 (LdcI:RavA) before incubating for 30 min at room temperature. The milk-blocked membranes were incubated with His-RavA (10 µg/mL) or LdcI (6.5 µg/mL) alone or with the LdcI-RavA complex (corresponding to the final concentration of LdcI and RavA proteins of 6.5 µg/mL and 10 µg/mL, respectively) diluted in TBST supplemented with 10 mM MgCl

This experiment was performed as previously described

To construct an MG1655-

Planar lipid bilayer measurements were performed at 25 °C using a home-made Teflon cells separated by a diaphragm with a circular hole with the diameter of 0.5 mm. The membrane was formed by a painting method using a mixture of lipids composed of PA:PG:PE (10:45:45) dissolved in

Further information on research design is available in the



Supplementary Information

Peer Review File

Reporting Summary