Spatiotemporal control of engineered
microbes enables patterning and localization of microbial activity
in applications ranging from in vivo therapeutics to engineered living
materials. Temperature can be applied globally or with spatial specificity
as a deeply penetrant, noninvasive input signal.

One of the most promising classes of thermal bioswitch
repressors
are mutants of CI857

In this technical note, we examine the ability of tunable
TcI proteins
to serve as cold-on transcriptional activators of specific genes of
interest. We demonstrate temperature-responsive activation by two
TcI variants with transition set points at 35.5 and 38.5 °C in

Different applications of
thermal control may require different
temperature thresholds for gene activation. Thus, we characterized
the ability to activate transcription of two previously developed
mutants, TcI38 and TcI39, with bioswitch activation midpoints of 38
and 39 °C, respectively.

In our cold-on circuit, transcription
from the PRM promoter is
activated by either TcI38 or TcI39, which is in turn expressed both
from PRM readthrough and a weak constitutive LacI promoter (

TcI mutants
act as tunable, temperature-sensitive transactivators.
(a,b,c) Circuit diagrams of gene activation constructs. TcI

We quantified the gene expression level controlled by TcI38 or
TcI39 via GFP fluorescence measured by flow cytometry in comparison
with the level driven by wildtype CI or without an activator (

After establishing the basic capabilities of tunable
TcI activators,
we endeavored to combine them with TcI repression. We assembled a
construct wherein expression of GFP from the PRM promoter is activated
by TcI39 and expression of mRFP1 (RFP) from the PR–PL tandem
promoter is repressed by TcI39 (

TcI39 simultaneously activates and represses,
serving as a temperature-controlled
state switch. (a,b) Circuit diagram of TcI39 switch construct with
state of regulation arcs indicated at low (a) and high (b) temperature.
TcI39 activates expression of mWasabi (GFP) from the PRM promoter
and represses expression of mRFP1 (RFP) from the PR–PL tandem
promoter. (c) Thermal profile of GFP and RFP co-expression. Central
plot: bivariate kernel density estimation for RFP channel and GFP
channel. Marginal plots: summed frequency histograms for RFP channel
(right) and GFP channel (top). NF indicates nonfluorescent control
measured in each channel (not shown in central plot for visual clarity;
overlaps with 32.0, 33.3, 35.1 °C histograms in RFP channel).
(d) Thermal profile of mean population fluorescence of GFP and RFP
expressed in

Our results establish the use
of temperature-sensitive CI mutants
as heat-inactivated transcriptional activators with tunable set points.
In addition, due to the dual nature of these transcription factors,
they can be used to control the expression of two genes in one circuit
complementarily, with one expressed below the thermal set point, and
the other above. The two TcI variants tested in this study operate
at distinct set points within a range convenient for bacterial synthetic
biology applications. The range of available set points could be further
widened through directed evolution of TcI.