Bacterial protein secretion to the exterior environment involves transporting the protein across several physical barriers. For Gram-negative bacteria these include the cytoplasmic membrane (CM), a relatively thin peptidoglycan (PG) cell wall and the outer membrane. Some proteins, after secretion through the CM, need to be folded in the periplasmic space, which can prevent them from transiting the outer membrane. To get around this problem, Gram-negative bacteria have evolved a Type II secretion systems (TTSS), which have many proteins similar to those found in Type IV pili (T4P) (

One possible mechanism for secretion of folded proteins from the space between the CM and the PG layer in Gram-positive bacteria would be a system analogous to TTSS in Gram-negative bacteria (

In 2017 a paper by Obana et al (

These two seemingly disparate areas of research described above overlapped when we undertook experiments to determine if T4P-associated pilin proteins were involved in protein secretion. Prior to the published observations of Obana et al, we discovered that the von Willebrand A domain protein, CPE0517, designated as BsaC by Obana et al. (

To test our hypothesis that T4P proteins were needed for protein secretion, we examined the secretome of strains with in-frame deletions in genes encoding Type 4 pilins

We screened the secretome of in-frame deletion mutants in four pilin-encoding genes,

To determine if other Type IV pilus (T4P) related genes were needed for secretion of BsaC, we expressed the

A major difference in the structures of T4P and TTSS is the type IV pilus extends beyond the outer membrane (Gram-negative) or PG layer (Gram-positive, (

To determine if there are generalized secretion defects in T4P mutants, we examined whether each mutant in the T4P-associated genes was able to secrete another protein, the phospholipase-sphingomyelinase, PLC. Secretion of PLC can be easily detected by a ring of precipitation around a colony using egg yolk agar, and we found that none of the T4P mutants showed a detectable decrease in PLC secretion (

Since the

Since it was possible that, like BsaC, BsaA in its oligomer form was secreted with the aid of T4P-associated proteins, we expressed a clone containing just the

BsaA forms very heat and SDS resistant oligomers ((

In monomeric structures, residues 28–38 would extend out as disordered loops (

The

It is unclear why this bond was created by AlphaFold. In the documentation of AlphaFold Multimer (

This amyloid-like fold and interdigitation is seen in other Gram-positive bacteria, such as TasA in

The AlphaFold Multimer models predicted an isopeptide bond was formed between N35 and K74 from adjacent residues in a BsaA oligomer. To test this computational prediction, we made point mutant substitutions of each residue to alanine, forming N35A and K74A mutants, along with a double N35A/K74A mutant. His-tagged versions of these mutant forms were expressed along with

We also tested the N35A/K74A mutant and observed that it showed a similar loss of oligomerization as did the N35A mutant (

Spontaneous or self-catalyzed isopeptide bond formation is catalyzed by an acidic Glu or Asp residue located within the hydrophobic pocket where the Asn and Lys residues are located (

To investigate the cellular location of the BsaA oligomers, a FAST gene fusion to the

Because the BsaA-FAST fusion experiments indicated BsaA oligomers were located on the cell surface and SEM images of the BsaA matrix proteins suggested they were in the form of fibrils associated with the bacterial surface (

Previous results by Obana et al (

Since a BlastP search with BsaA only identifies homologs in closely related Clostridial species, an iterative search with profile hidden Markov models was employed. This analysis resulted in the identification of 2,172 proteins, including the previously described TasA from

In addition to BsaA, we identified three other uncharacterized proteins in

Based on the putative functions of gene neighbors, the BsaA/TasA family members appear to be involved in the assembly of surface filament structures (

The original goal of this work to determine if Gram-positive bacteria have the functional equivalent of TTSS that are found in Gram-negative bacteria. Since TTSS have a similar overall architecture and mechanism as T4P (

BsaC monomer secretion may appear to be independent of BsaA oligomers, but it is possible that they are being secreted simultaneously, since we did not track BsaA and BsaC secretion at the same time. The biological role that BsaC plays in biofilm matrix functions is unknown, but it is intriguing that the protein contains a VWA domain, which is widespread in eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea and is associated with protein-protein interactions (

As noted above, BsaC is in an operon with genes encoding a signal peptidase, SipW and two proteins (BsaA and BsaB) with homology to the main biofilm protein of

Although we observed that a

Since our results and that of Obana et al both showed that oligomers of BsaA were extremely resistant to heat and other denaturants (

BsaB, the other biofilm protein encoded in the operon, did not form oligomers, did not become covalently linked to BsaA oligomers (

Taking all these results into consideration, we have constructed a model showing the mechanisms underlying the assembly of BsaA into cross-linked oligomers (

The phylogeny of BsaA-like proteins shows they are widespread amongst Gram-positive bacteria but also present in some Gram-negative bacteria and archaea (

Bacterial strains, plasmids, and primers used in this study are listed in

In-frame deletions of T4P-associated genes were made using the method of Nariya et al. (

Cultures of strain HN13 were grown for 16 h in BHI medium (i.e., into stationary phase) and the bacteria were removed by centrifugation in a table top centrifuge. The culture supernatants were removed and passed through a 0.45 μM filter. Proteins in the culture medium were precipitated using 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation and washed twice in acetone. After drying, sample pellets were resuspended in water and then 4X SDS-PAGE sample buffer (

Because the SipW signal peptidase is likely needed for processing the secretion signal on BsaC (

The gene fusion was constructed using overlapping PCR of the FAST coding region on plasmid pAG104 FAST (

Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against the BsaC peptide sequence N-CNIEGDKISWDRGEN-C were produced by GenScript USA, Inc. along with pre-immune serum as a negative control. Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against the PilA3 peptide sequence N-CIKIDNSKDSIDLTR-C were produced by Yenzyme Antibodies, LLC. along with pre-immune serum as a negative control. To test for surface exposure of PilA3 pilins, the bacteria were fixed with 2.5% paraformaldehyde in Dulbecco’s phosphate buffer saline (DPBS), incubated with rabbit serum with anti-PilA3 antibodies, washed with DPBS and incubated with goat anti-rabbit antibodies fluorescently tagged with Alexafluor 647 (Invitrogen). Stained cells were imaged on an Olympus IX71 fluorescent inverted microscope equipped with a CoolSnap HQ2 CCD camera and DeltaVision deconvolution and image analysis software.

Overnight cultures were grown in BHI supplemented with chloramphenicol and diluted 1:50 into fresh BHI medium pre-incubated at 37°C. The cultures were grown for one hour then induced by adding lactose, to a final concentration of 10 mM, to the growth media every 30 min for 3 h. Following induction, 1 mL of culture supernatant was collected by centrifugation, and proteins precipitated using TCA, as described above. Resulting precipitates were resuspended in 50 uL of SDS-PAGE loading buffer with 100 mM DTT, the pH was adjusted using one μL of 1.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 9, if necessary. Five μL of sample was loaded per well, and SDS-PAGE was performed. Following SDS-PAGE, proteins were transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane utilizing the iBlot system (Bio-Rad, Inc), and developed with serum containing anti-BsaC antibodies at 1:250 dilution, followed by a Dylight 550 labeled fluorescent secondary goat anti-rabbit antibody (Thermo-Fisher). Imaging was performed on a Typhoon gel scanner, and mean pixel intensity was measured for each band utilizing the Amersham Typhoon densitometry control software.

The

BsaA oligomer secretion by

The membranes were placed in a Snap i.d. 2.0 system (Millipore Sigma) which uses a vacuum system to pull solutions through the membrane (referred to as washing steps below). Once set up, a solution containing Tris-buffered saline (TBS) (pH 7.4), 0.1% Tween 20 (TBST), and 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) was added as a blocker. Both primary and secondary antibodies were added to separate aliquots of the solution containing TBST and 1% BSA. In the first step, the primary antibody solution was incubated for 10 minutes on the membrane, followed by three washings with TBST. Then the secondary antibody solution was left to sit for 10 minutes on the membrane, followed by three washings with TBST. The primary antibody utilized was OctA-probe H-5 (1:250 dilution) used to detect the FLAG epitope (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The secondary antibody utilized for these experiments was StarBright700 goat anti-mouse (Bio-Rad) (1:10,000 dilution). The fluorescently labeled immunoblots were imaged using a ChemiDoc MP imaging system (Bio-Rad), and the intensity of the fluorescence was measured using the ChemiDoc MP imaging software for densitometry measurements.

Membranes were transferred to a container and blocked with EveryBlot blocking Buffer (Bio-Rad). Antibodies were diluted with EveryBlot blocking buffer and applied to membranes, followed by a minimum of five washes with TBST.

The primary antibodies utilized included OctA-probe H-5 (1:227 dilution) used to detect FLAG, and HA-Tag F-7 (1:227 dilution) used to detect HA (both from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA). Membranes submerged in EveryBlot blocking buffer with primary antibody were incubated at 4°C overnight. The secondary antibody utilized for these experiments was StarBright700 goat anti-mouse (Bio-Rad) (1:13,333 dilution), incubated for one hour at room temperature. Images of the immunoblots were taken using a ChemiDoc MP imaging system (Bio-Rad), to measure the intensity of the fluorescence.

Western blots to detect oligomerization of BsaA mutants were performed by expressing the

BsaA from

BsaA-like protein sequences were identified with 3 iterations of jackhmmer (