The majority of natural products
(NPs) produced by microbes have been discovered using top-down screening
methods, but there are two major limitations to this approach: novel
NPs may not be produced under laboratory culturing conditions, and
there is a growing risk of rediscovery of a known NP. Employing genome-guided
approaches to identify biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) that potentially
encode novel NPs before screening assays are performed provides several
advantages.

Improving expression

Lanthipeptides
are a class of RiPPs characterized by the post-translational
installation of thioether-cross-linked bis-amino acids known as lanthionine
(Lan) and methyllanthionine (MeLan). Thioether cross-linkages are
introduced by operon-encoded modification enzymes that dehydrate serine
and threonine to form dehydroalanine (Dha) and dehydrobutyrine (Dhb),
respectively. Ring structures are formed by enzymatic cyclization
of the linear peptide

Synthetase-mediated ring installation makes the location of
lanthionine
rings difficult to predict

Despite all
of the difficulties in isolating novel lanthipeptides,
they are still sought because of the broad range of bioactivities
already displayed by the group.

Lanthipeptides are classified
into five classes based on amino
acid sequences of the lanthionine synthetases instead of the peptide
amino acid sequences. Currently, the five classes of lanthipeptides
are class I (LanBCs), class II (LanMs), class III (LanKC), class IV
(LanL), and class V (LanYK).

(a) The

Phylogenetically, the VdsC and
VdsB proteins are classified as
class I lanthipeptides due to their independent nature and homology
(

Phylogenetic placement of the VdsC and VdsB amino acid
sequences
within the known class I lanthipeptide synthetases. Light green branches
highlight the VdsC and VdsB proteins. Red is epidermin-like, pink
is epicidin-like, purple is nisin-like, dark blue is subtilin-like,
light blue is paenicidin-like, cyan is microbisporicin-like, and dark
green is pinensin. Accession numbers represent putative lanthipeptide
LanC cyclases in the conserved domain CD04793 in (a) and LanB dehydratases
in pfam pf04738 (N-terminal) and pfam pf14028 (C-terminal) combined
in (b). Solid line branches belong to lanthipeptide modification machinery
from Bacillota (Gram-positive hosts), while dotted lines represent
lanthipeptide operons from Bacteroidota and Gammaproteobacteria (Gram-negative)
hosts. Vertical blue lines represent the phylogenetic location of
modification machinery that produces lanthipeptides with antibacterial
activity against some other Gram-positive bacteria like

The putative

(a) Heterologous coexpression of the VdsA-1
and -2 lanthipeptides
with the VdsCB modification machinery in

The VdsA1 and VdsA2 peptides were liberated from
GFP

(a) HPLC-C8-purified
VdsA1 liberated from GFP using NisP was separated
into samples P1A and P1B, which were collected for further analysis
with UHPLC–MSMS. Samples P1A and P1B produced the TICs in (b)
and (c), respectively. Accurate mass measurements indicated that the
peaks observed in (b) and (c) both represented quadruply dehydrated
VdsA1 (

(a) HPLC-C8-purified VdsA2 liberated from GFP using NisP
was separated
into samples P2A and P2B, which were collected for further analysis
with UHPLC–MSMS. Samples P2A and P2B produced the TICs shown
in (b) and (c), respectively. Accurate mass measurements indicated
that the most abundant species in P2B-II observed in (c) represented
VdsA2 with five dehydrations ([M – 5H

Samples P1A and P1B from
VdsA1 were further resolved into the peaks
P1A-I, P1A-II, and P1A-III (

The most abundant species in peak P1A-I, at

Similar
mass fragmentation patterns were observed for the P1B sample
compared to the P1A sample derived from the VdsA1 expression. The
accurate mass measurements showed that the most abundant species in
P1B-II corresponds to the mass of quadruply dehydrated VdsA1, [M –
4H

The most
abundant species in peak P1B-I, at

For the VdsA2 expression, accurate mass measurement showed that
the most abundant species in P2A-II (

The most abundant species in peak P2A-I,
at

Accurate mass
measurement showed that the most abundant species
in P2B-II corresponds to the VdsA2 peptide with five dehydrations,
[M – 5H

In addition to the dehydration
of Ser and Thr residues observed
in the VdsA1 and -A2 samples, the absence of MMTS adducts indicates
that all cysteine residues are involved in a thioether cross-linkage.
However, the unambiguous ring topologies in VdsA1, between Dha-11
and Dha-15 with Cys-16 and Cys-18, cannot be assigned with mass spectrometry
alone. The formation of lanthionine rings between neighboring Dha/Dhb
residues and a cognate cysteine residue has been reported in mersacidin,
and therefore, a lanthionine bond between Dha15 and C16 in VdsA1 cannot
be ruled out.

It
is difficult to anticipate the bioactivity of VdsA1 and VdsA2
peptides because there are no similar peptides with a characterized
bioactivity. However, the VdsCB biosynthetic machinery provides more
insight into the VdsA1 and VdsA2 lanthipeptides’ evolutionary
history.

The marine
isolate

Representatives
of the LanC cyclases
conserved domain (CD04793) and LanB dehydratase Pfams pf04738 (C-terminus)
with pf14028 (N-terminus) were downloaded from NCBI (

DNA analysis, manipulation, and
plasmid cloning were performed according standard protocols described
by Sambrook

Restriction enzymes
(REs) and T4 DNA ligase were purchased from New England Biolabs (NEB)
(Ipswich, MA, USA) and used according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Amplification of DNA

Oligonucleotides
were designed using the CLC main workbench program
(CLC bio, Aarhus, Denmark) and purchased from Inqaba Biotechnical
Industries (Pretoria, South Africa). DNA sequencing was performed
by the Central Analytical Facilities (CAF) at the University of Stellenbosch,
South Africa. DNA synthesis of the putative lanthipeptide gene sequences
was performed by Biomatik (Cambridge, Ontario, Canada).

Agarose
gel electrophoresis was used for the analysis and purification
of RE-digested DNA fragments in TBE buffer at 10 V/cm using an Ephortec
3000 V power supply (Triad Scientific, Manasquan, NJ, USA).

The pRSF–VdsCB backbone vector
was constructed by cloning the

Three putative lanthipeptides were identified upstream of the

The pRSF–VdsCB pDNA was digested
with

The Minifors 5L bioreactor
was filled with 3.5 L of Terrific broth and inoculated with overnight
cultures of

The GFP–VdsA1 and −VdsA2 fusions
were purified from their respective cell-free lysates by IMAC using
the His-Bind resin according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The IMAC elution, which contained the respective target proteins in
SB500 buffer (50 mM Tris, 500 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, pH 8.0),
was diluted 30× with AB buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8.3). The diluted
eluents were respectively loaded onto a 5 mL DEAE Sepharose anion-exchange
resin and washed with 2 column volumes of AB50 buffer (50 mM Tris,
50 mM NaCl, pH 8.3). The GFP–VdsA1 and −VdsA2 fusion
proteins were respectively eluted in AB150 (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl,
pH 8.3).

The HPLC purification was performed
using an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system with a ZORBAX 300SB-C8
column (4.6 mm × 150 mm, 5 μm particle size) (Agilent,
Santa Clara, CA, USA). Sample separation was achieved using linear
gradient elution from 10% solvent B (acetonitrile + 0.1% TFA) to 60%
solvent B over 25 min against solvent A (analytically pure water +
0.1% TFA). Elution profiles were monitored at 230 and 214 nm, respectively.

A Thermo Scientific Ultimate
3000 RSLC system equipped with a C18 trap column (2 cm × 100
μm) and a C18 analytical column (Luna C18, 5 μm, Phenomenex)
was used for further analysis of HPLC-purified P1A, P1B, P2A, and
P2B samples. Solvent A (2% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% formic
acid) and solvent B (100% acetonitrile) were used for sample separation
over a 55 min Chromeleon nonlinear gradient 5 from 5% to 50% solvent
B at 0.3 μL/min. The samples were loaded onto the trap column
in solvent A at 2 μL/min from a temperature-controlled autosampler
set to 7 °C. Loading was performed for 5 min before the sample
was eluted onto the analytical column. Chromatography was performed
at 45 °C, and the outflow was delivered to the mass spectrometer
through a stainless steel nanobore emitter.

Mass spectrometry
was performed using a Thermo Scientific Fusion mass spectrometer equipped
with a Nanospray Flex ionization source. Data were collected in positive
mode with the spray voltage set to 1.9 kV and the ion transfer capillary
set to 275 °C. Spectra were internally calibrated using polysiloxane
ions at

Peptide fragmentation data were analyzed with
MZmine