Arsenic (As) is a widespread contaminant present in food and drinking water, with its inorganic forms, arsenite [As(III)] and arsenate [As(V)], being the most toxic species found. Many

The Pho regulon is controlled by a two-component signal transduction system (TCS) which consists of a membrane histidine kinase sensor protein (HK) and a cytoplasmic transcriptional response regulator (RR). These two proteins are named PhoB and PhoR in

Information on phosphate metabolism is far more limited in other bacterial groups such as Lactobacillales. Order Lactobacillales is a group of low-GC gram-positive, nonsporulating, fermentative and generally acid tolerant bacteria. The group encompasses relevant pathogens such as

Recently, it has been shown that uptake of arsenate is possibly mediated by the Pst transporter in

This study aims to gain insight into this effect by characterizing the PhoP RR and by a comparative transcriptomic analysis of

Strains used in this study are listed in

Gene

For protein production, cultures (0.5 L) were grown in LB broth supplemented with ampicillin and chloramphenicol at 37 °C with shaking to an OD

For transcriptomic analyses, three RNA samples of each strain grown in LP-MEI to OD

The core Pho sequence identified in

An internal 520 bp fragment of gene

Purified 6 × (His)PhoP (10 µg) was incubated in 20 μl of Tris–HCl 50 mM pH 7.4, NaCl 100 mM, MgCl

Different DNA fragments spanning the putative promoter regions of selected genes were amplified by PCR (Supplementary file 1, Table S4; Supplementary file 2, Figure S7). Binding reactions were carried out in 15 μl of binding buffer (2.5 mM Tris–HCl [pH 7.5], 100 mM NaCl, 25 mM MgCl

We hypothesized that the

Expression analysis of

The transcript levels in

A remarkable number of genes showed significant differences under these conditions, indicating a pleiotropic effect of PhoP in gene expression (

Transcriptional analysis of

An analysis of the gene functional categories affected by the

Enrichment analysis of different gene functional categories upon

The transcriptome data corroborated the previous qPCR findings, showing that the

A search for putative PhoP binding sites in the promoter regions of

Hits found with GLAM2Scan using the motif derived from

* Putative PHO boxes are underlined and in bold for DNA fragments that were tested by EMSA.

** The distance to the translational start site is shown in parenthesis for

*** Only statistically significant fold change values are indicated.

Ery

Subsequently, we selected fragments corresponding to the promoter regions of

Phosphorylated PhoP binds to promoter regions of some PhoP-regulated genes. (A) In vitro phosphorylation of 6 × (His)PhoP by acetyl-phosphate (20 mM). Protein samples were incubated with acetyl-phosphate and resolved in Phos-tag polyacrylamide gels. Some samples were heated at 95 °C before loading, which dephosphorylates the thermolabile Asp∼P bond. Mw, molecular weight (NZYColour Molecular Weight Marker II); (B) EMSA assays of

We decided to focus on the genes that showed the greatest variation as possible candidates to explain resistance to As(III). The

To test the functionality of

Growth of

A characterization of

Our results led us to identify the diminished expression of the

Pyruvate catabolic pathways leading to acetyl-P present in

The mechanism of regulation of PhoP on

Mapping of reads from the transcriptomic analysis in the

This study has also allowed us gaining insight into the Pho regulon of

In

The binding of PhoP∼P to the

In contrast to the weak effect on the expression of the

In summary, our results have identified AckA as the protein responsible for the As(III) resistance phenotype observed in a Δ

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.