As a bio-based, bio-degradable polymer, polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) is a promising alternative to petrochemical-based plastics [

As the xylose operon in bacteria has

The bacteria and plasmids used in this study are listed in

For comparing the transcription level of genes related to xylose metabolism,

PHB production was determined using gas chromatography and other methods as described in previous studies, with slight modifications [

The lignocellulosic biomass hydrolysate used in this study is a saccharomate® derived from

For analysis of glucose and xylose, culture samples were centrifuged at 10,000 ×

High-performance liquid chromatography on a PerkinElmer system equipped with a refractive index detector (Waltham, USA) and an Aminex HPX-87H column (300 × 7.8 mm internal diameter) was used to analyze the concentration of various carbon sources. A mobile phase of 0.008 N H

To compare XylR amounts between various

To prefix the cell specimens, 1 ml of each culture sample was collected, centrifuged, and mixed with Karnovsky's fixative solution containing 2% formaldehyde. The samples were then fixed with 1% osmium tetroxide in 0.05 M sodium cacodylate buffer and dehydrated in ethanol gradually (v/v) (30, 50, 70, 80, 90, and 100%). The transition step was performed using propylene. The samples were settled in different ratios of propylene oxide and Spurr's resin (v/v) (1:1 and 1:2); 100% Spurr's resin at 70°C in a dry oven was used to solidify the samples for ultramicrotome sectioning. The specimens were placed on a grid and observed under a transmission electron microscopy (TEM), with an accelerating voltage of 80 kV. TEM images of the cells and PHB granules were obtained at ×15k, ×25k, and ×40k magnification.

As

In contrast, the highest PHB accumulation (1.14 ± 0.09 g/l) was achieved for HJ020 when incubated in a 1:1 mixture of glucose and xylose, with a DCW of 2.11 ± 0.11 g/l. The higher the ratio of xylose at 1% of the total carbon source concentration, the lower the cell growth and PHB accumulation in both control strain and HJ020, suggesting that

First, DCW and PHB accumulation of HJ020 were confirmed at concentrations of 1–6% of glucose and xylose mixture (1:1). At 1% sugar mixture, the DCW of HJ020 was 1.82 g/l, and PHB yield (1.33 g/l) of 73.22% of the total cell weight was obtained. There was no marked change in cell growth and PHB production even though the concentration of carbon sources increased (2~6%). As shown in the

For optimization of the nitrogen source concentration, the cell growth and PHB production of

IPTG concentration was optimized at 1% sugar mixture and 0.1% yeast extract to control the optimal expression of

Under optimized conditions, time-dependent cell growth, PHB accumulation, and sugar mixture consumption of

To confirm the effect of

To evaluate the transcription level of

To verify if the overexpression of

As expected, BL21 (DE3) showed increased PHB production by overexpression of

We found that

To verify the universality of

Supplementary data for this paper are available on-line only at