Significant research efforts in the past strived
to develop efficient
genetic tools for

In this work, we present Zymo-Parts, a modular
toolbox based on
Golden-Gate cloning, allowing for a variable combination of different
inducible and constitutive promoters and ribosome binding sites with
genes of interest into versions of a shuttle vector based on pZMOB6.
Since the first publication of Golden-Gate cloning in 2009

The applicability of Golden Gate assembly
for

The central goal
of our Zymo-Parts toolbox described in the following is to offer genetic
elements functional in

Scheme of the Zymo-Parts system. The system is organized
in four
levels with each level meant to carry out specific functions. Level
0 is designed to house individual, basic modules that can be assembled
into level neg1 (−1) to form rbs–goi pairs or to assemble
TUs in level 1. The rbs–goi pair of level neg1 can be assembled
into multigene constructs in level 0, which can then be put into level
1 to form an operon as a TU. Further, the TUs of level 1 can be combined
into coexpression plasmids in level 2, which can again be combined
back to form even larger constructs in level 1. All this is made possible
through alternating type IIS restriction enzyme (BbsI, BsaI) recognition
sites between levels, as is typical for Golden-Gate cloning systems.
Additionally, blue–white screening through lacZα facilitates
the procedure.

GoldenBraid mechanisms were used to incorporate
the back and forth
between level 0 and level neg1 and between level 2 and level 1.

We
tested four synthetic promoters (Pstrong1k, Pstrong10k, Pstrong100k*,
and PWGAN-1-29

All modules were assembled into level 1 position
3 reverse acceptors through cut-ligation. Constructs carrying the
ten constitutive promoters were compared for their

Box-plots showing
the medians of mCherry fluorescence intensity
driven by constitutive promoters in ZM4. In total, nine biological
replicates (Rep.) from three independent cultivations were measured
using flow cytometry. The median of the data points per construct
is displayed in each box.

Since we offer four terminators in Zymo-Parts,
we constructed three
additional versions of the

In addition
to the constitutive promoters, three inducible systems were tested
with respect to expression strength and regulation. The tetracycline
controlled TetR-Ptet system and the IPTG controlled LacI-PA1lacO1
system had already been applied for heterologous gene expression in

Box-plots showing the mCherry fluorescence intensity from measurements
of the inducible promoters TetR-Ptet, XylS-

For all three promoter systems, an inducer-dependent
expression
pattern was observed. Expression from TetR-Ptet was low without induction
and reached a strong peak expression at 500 nM aTc. A similar behavior
was observed for the LacI-PA1lacO1 with an even higher fully induced
expression level reached at the highest IPTG concentration tested.
Both expression systems allow for gradual expression with a broad
dynamic range within 10–500 nM aTc and 10–500 μM
IPTG, respectively. The observed maximal expression level of both
systems is comparable to strong constitutive promoters like Ppdc.
The XylS-

To test our constructs for utility in a metabolic engineering
scenario, we aimed to enhance lactate production in Z.

Metabolic reactions of ethanol and lactate production
in

We constructed different strains carrying plasmids
with the

The detection limit of lactate
is about 1 mM.

Since homologous recombination is frequently used for genome engineering
in

The resulting colonies after transformation with pZP778 were checked
under blue light for mCherry fluorescence. All colonies showed fluorescence,
and nine colonies were checked for expression strength (see

Box-plots showing the flow-cytometer-based intensity measurements
for the operon construct (pZP697) and the controls: pZP465 (expressing

The colonies obtained from the transformation with
pZP1013 were
checked by PCR for correct insertion. The resulting strain

Our Zymo-Parts toolbox offers a GoldenBraid-based
approach to combine level 0 modules of rbs and goi into a combined
level neg1 module. As each of those level neg1 modules has a determined
position for the reassembly into a level 0 module, the sophisticated
construction of polycistronic transcription units in level 1 containing
two to five of those rbs–goi building blocks becomes possible
(see

To test this operon-building
mechanism, we constructed three level neg1 plasmids that combined
three different rbs, generated by the rbs calculator

Experiments were also carried out
with a plasmid (pZP741) equipped
with identical rbs (rbs10k) upstream of all three fluorescence genes.
Here, we observed cultures showing varying levels of fluorescence
for all three proteins. An exemplary comparison between the two operons
can be found in

We finally evaluated the assembly
efficiency of our toolbox. As already mentioned before, for our Golden
Gate Assembly, we used the four base overhangs described by Potatov
et al.,

In this work, we introduce Zymo-Parts, a
Golden-Gate cloning-based
toolbox for modular genetic engineering of

Using the modular Golden-Gate
cloning approach of Zymo-Parts, a
set of plasmids could be efficiently constructed with different combinations
of promoters, regulators, and rbs for constitutive and controlled
gene expression in

In addition to natural promoters,
three synthetic promoters with
different expression strength were designed. Pstrong1k and Pstrong10k
allowed for low to moderate expression; Pstrong100k* showed an extremely
high expression strength. Notably, we were only able to obtain a mutated
version of Patrong100K, with a deletion of one base in the −10
element. However, we found that the promoters designed by the promoter
calculator can be ranked for expression strength in the order they
were designed for, suggesting that the promoter calculator based on
σ

Besides
constitutive promoters, gene expression can also be controlled
using inducible systems. Usage of inducible promoters allows dynamic
adjustment of gene expression and broadens the applications of plasmid-based
gene expression. The functionality of the TetR-Ptet and LacI-PA1lacO1
has already been shown

Besides expression of single genes, Zymo-Parts
also supports the
expression of sets of genes. We demonstrated the expression of genes
of three different fluorescent reporter proteins contained in a single
operon. We observed a crosstalk between mCherry and eBFP2 fluorescence
that blurred the results. However, considering the low eBFP2 crosstalk
signal observed for the strain with

The possibility
to easily build operons and combine them with regulatory
systems holds great potential for metabolic engineering of

We could also demonstrate the utility of the Zymo-Parts
system
for genome engineering. The integrations of a Kan

We used the production of lactate to
test our toolbox in a metabolic
engineering application. We overexpressed the lactate dehydrogenase
gene

The accessibility
of Golden-Gate cloning and the availability of
a library of modules will simplify metabolic engineering projects
for

For plasmid
replication in

The different DNA fragments to be used in the construction of the
plasmids were generated by PCR using Q5 DNA polymerase (NEB) according
to the recommendations of the manufacturer. The corresponding primers
and assembly procedures are listed in the

For electroporation, a colony of

For the quantification of

Seed cultures
and batch fermentations of all lactate producing strains were performed
in a

Extracellular lactate, ethanol, and glucose
were quantified by HPLC using an Agilent 1100 series system equipped
with a Rezex-ROA column. 10 μL of the sample was injected onto
the column by an autosampler and analyzed using isocratic elution
with 4 mM H

ZM4 was transformed
with pZP778 to integrate expression units for